ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNUAL REPORT
2016 - 17

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ
Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad - 500 030
INDIA

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Photographs

:

P. Subrahmanyam

Cover Designed by :

V. G. Bhat

Printed by

M/s. VAISHNAVI LASER GRAPHICS, Hyderabad. Ph : 040 - 27552178

:

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CONTENTS
S.No.

Chapters

Pages

1

Overview

1

2

Training

9

3.

Research

21

4.

Action Research and Village Adoption

27

5.

Consultancy Studies

31

6

Networking with SIRD&PRs and ETCs

33

7.

Rural Technology Development and Dissemination

41

8.

Special Projects and Resource Cells

54

9.

Academic Programmes

69

10.

New Initiatives

75

11.

Documentation and Information Dissemination

83

12.

NIRD&PR- North Eastern Regional Centre, Guwahati

89

13.

Administration

102

14.

Finance and Accounts

118

Annexures (I to XXIII)

121-216

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Abbreviations & Acronyms
AARDO

: African – Asian Rural Development Organisation

APOs

: Assistant Project Officers

BDO

: Block Development Officer

BMMU

: Block Mission Monitoring Units

CIRDAP

: Centre for Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific

CICTAB

: Centre for International Cooperation and Training in Agricultural Banking

CCDUs

: Community Capacity Development Units

CEO

: Chief Executive Officer

CBO

: Community Based Organisation

CFTs

: Cluster Facilitation Teams

DCCBs

: District Central Cooperative Banks

DDU- GKY

: Deena Dayal Upadhyaya Grameena Kousalya Yojana

DPRO

: District Public Relations Officer

DRDA

: District Rural Development Agency

DMMU

: District Mission Monitoring Unit

ETC

: Extension Training Centre

FPOs

: Farmer Producers Organisations

GIS

: Geographic Information Systems

IBDLP

: Integrated Basin Development & Livelihood Promotion Programme

ICT

: Information and Communication Technology

ICDS

: Integrated Child Development Services

IIWM

: Indian Institute of Water Management

ISRO

: Indian Space Research Organisation

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ITEC

: Indian Technical Economic Cooperation

IEC

: Information, Education and Communication

IWMP

: Integrated Watershed Management Programme

MGNREGA

: Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act

MIS

: Management Information System

NABCONS

: NABARD Consultancy Services

NERLP

: North East Rural Livelihood Project

NGO

: Non-Governmental Organisation

NIRD&PRNERC

: NIRD&PR-North Eastern Regional Centre

NMMU

: National Mission Monitoring Unit

NRLM

: National Rural Livelihoods Mission

NRRDA

: National Rural Roads Development Authority

NSAP

: National Social Assistance Programme

PHED

: Public Health Engineering Departments

POs

: Project Officers

PIAs

: Project Implementing Agencies

PRI

: Panchayati Raj Institution

PESA

: Panchayat Extension in Scheduled Areas

PMGSY

: Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana

PHED

: Public Health Engineering Department

RDDs

: Rural Development Departments

PMKSY

: Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana

RGPSA

: Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan

RSETI

: Rural Self-Employment Training Institute

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

RWSS

: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation

SAGY

: Sansaad Adarsh Gram Yojana

SBM

: Swachh Bharat Mission

SCAAP

: Special Commonwealth African Assistance Programme

SFC

: State Finance Commissions

SHG

: Self-Help Group

SRLM

: State Rural Livelihood Mission

SRRDA

: State Rural Roads Development Agency

SSA

: Sarva Siksha Abhiyan

SWSM

: State Water Sanitation Missions

WSOs

: Water Sanitation Organisations

TOTs

: Training of Trainers

ZP

: Zilla Parishad

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER - 1

OVER
VIEW
OVERVIEW
National Institute of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR), an autonomous
organisation under the Ministry of Rural
Development, is a premier national centre of
excellence in rural development and panchayati raj.
It builds capacities of development functionaries,
elected representatives, and other stakeholders
through inter-related activities of training, research
and consultancy. Originally established as National
Institute of Community Development in 1958 at
Mussoorie, the Institute was shifted to its Hyderabad
Campus in 1965 and renamed as National Institute of
Rural Development (NIRD) in 1977. Recognising the
need for more focus on strengthening Panchayati Raj
system and capacity building of Panchayati Raj
Institutes' functionaries, as per the decision of the
General Council of the Institute the name of NIRD
has been changed as National Institute of Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR) w.e.f
December 4, 2013. The Institute is located in the
serene rural surroundings of Rajendranagar in a
campus spread over an extent of 174.21 acres and
about 15 km away from the historic city of Hyderabad.
The NIRD&PR celebrated its golden jubilee year of
establishment in 2008.

The Institute undertakes the given below activities
mainly focusing on Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj strengthening:
i.

organise training programmes, conferences,
seminars and workshops for senior level
development
managers,
elected
representatives, bankers, NGOs and other
stakeholders

ii.

undertake, aid, promote and coordinate
research

iii.

study functioning of the Panchayati Raj
Institutions and rural development
programmes across the States

iv.

analyse and propose solutions to problems in
planning and implementation of the
programmes for rural development and

v.

develop content and disseminate information
through periodicals, reports, e-modules and
other publications

The Institute has the mandate to facilitate
development of rural poor and enhance their quality
of life. Considering the huge and varied challenges

1

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

faced in this regard, NIRD&PR as an apex Institute has
to address the training and capacity development
needs of a large clientele. Training of development

Activities of the Institute
Training

functionaries and elected representatives is a precondition in the entire rural development process to
make the policy formulation and programme
implementation effective. The Institute acts as a
“think-tank” of Ministry of Rural Development and
undertakes training and research including action
research on various flagship programmes of the
Ministry. The Institute’s services are available to
other Ministries / Departments of the Central and
State Governments, banking institutions, public and
private sector organisations, civil societies,
Panchayati Raj Institutions and other national and
international agencies connected with rural
development. In more than 50 years of its existence,
NIRD&PR has been playing its own modest but
credible role to facilitate qualitative changes in
programme management through a process of
training, research, action research, consultancy,
information dissemination and information building.
This has enabled the Institute to emerge as the
National Apex Institute in the area of rural
development and Panchayati Raj. Established in 1983
at Guwahati, North-Eastern Regional Centre (NERC)
of NIRD&PR is recognised as a premier organisation
in the field of rural development catering to the
capacity building needs of development functionaries
of the region. During 34 years of its existence, NERC
has developed expertise and experience in serving
the specific training and research needs of the northeastern region.

2

The Institute has been organising training
programmes, workshops, seminars, etc., on themes
relating to rural development and panchayati raj.
NIRD&PR has expertise and good infrastructure to
train senior and middle level development
functionaries engaged in policy formulation,
management and implementation of rural
development programmes. The focus of these
programmes is on the modalities and mechanisms of
programme management with special reference to
process aspects which will help the developmental
professionals to achieve the expected goals and
objectives of the initiatives. The training programmes
are intended to create knowledge base, develop skills
and infuse right attitudes and values. The Institute
has been enlarging its canvas of training activities
every year and has been successful in making them
more need-based and focused. The Institute could
achieve a very high rate of satisfaction of participants
by evolving and adopting new training methods and
techniques on continuous basis. Besides, the findings
of the research studies and action research are
utilised in training programmes as training inputs.
There has been an increase in the number of training
programmes of the Institute over the years on
sustained basis. There was significant increase in the
number of outreach programmes as well. Further, the
Institute has been endeavouring to share its expertise
and experience through international training
programmes for the professionals of developing
countries for promoting sustainable rural
development.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

During 2016-17, by organising 1463 programmes, a
total of 47683 participants were trained as against
38424 persons trained in 1326 programmes in the
previous year. During the year NIRD&PR organised
several workshops, seminars, symposiums and
national consultations and the deliberations of which
were published as reports and books.
Building the training capacities of its link institutions,
i.e. the State Institutes of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj (SIRD&PRs) and Extension Training
Centres (ETCs), is integral to Institute’s mandate. As
part of it, 1050 off-campus /regional and networking
programmes were organised at these institutions
during the year. The Institute also organised 25
international training programmes at the instance of
Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India and
other organisations. It works in close coordination
with international organisations like AARDO, CIRDAP,
UN Women, etc.
Recognising the importance of the emerging
application of Geo-informatics in various rural sectors,
Centre on Geo-Informatic Applications in Rural
Development (C-GARD) of the Institute designs
specialised programmes for imparting skills and
improving knowledge levels in the latest Geomatics
technology and tools.

Research
Research forms an important component of the
perspective of NIRD&PR. As part of it, the Institute
examines and analyses the factors contributing to
improvement of social well-being of rural people with
focus on the rural poor and other disadvantaged
groups through research, action research and
consultancy. Research conducted by the Institute is

field-based in nature with emphasis on current rural
development issues. It helps to understand various
grassroots level issues pertaining to rural
development. It also assists in policy formulation for
rural development and forms an important input in
Institute’s training programmes. The Institute
conducts studies to identify contemporary problems
and issues pertaining to programme implementation
and to suggest alternative strategies for improving
effectiveness of various programmes and schemes.
The direct approach to tackling development issues
related to the ‘quality of life’ of the rural poor has
been the focal area of research. The Ministry of Rural
Development places increased importance on the
feedback provided through the research studies taken
up by the Institute.
The Institute also undertakes location-specific action
research in which a theme or a model is field tested,
step-by-step, while actually implementing the
project on the ground. Day-to-day interventions are
modified according to the situation prevailing in the
location. The main focus is to evolve people-centered
approach in planning and implementation with local
decision making and participatory evaluation. It is in
fact a process of learning while doing. In order to
further strengthen the action oriented initiatives of
the Institute for effective implementation of rural
development and poverty alleviation programmes,
emphasis has been given on ‘village adoption’ by
adopting villages from the remote and backward areas
in different parts of the country. These studies will
enable NIRD&PR faculty members to keep
themselves abreast of grassroot realities and
development challenges. Besides, studies are takenup in collaboration with State Institutes of Rural
Development and with other institutions. NIRD&PR

3

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

provides consultancy support to various international
and national organisations on different development
themes. The Institute also takes up studies on the
request of Central ministries, State departments and
other organisations

development, NIRD&PR has established Rural

During 2016-17, 45 research studies were completed,
while 36 studies were on-going. In addition 84 studies
have been initiated during the year, planned to be
completed in the ensuing year.

models of rural houses with 40 different technologies.

Technology Park (RTP) in 1999. It aims at enhancing
the livelihoods of rural poor through skill promotion
and entrepreneurship development. The National
Rural Building Centre at RTP showcases cost-effective
A Sanitation Park was also established with a good
number of models of individual hygienic toilets which
are affordable by the rural masses. A Rural Technology
and Crafts Mela is organised every year to promote

Networking with State Institutes of
Rural Development and Extension
Training Centres

rural technologies, innovations, marketing of rural
products, etc.
During 2016-17, various activities organised by the RTP

As part of the the mandate to strengthen the RD
institutional network in the country, NIRD&PR, as a
national apex organisation, provides guidance to all
29 SIRD&PRs and 89 ETCs. It also facilitates financial
support under the Central Scheme of the Ministry of
Rural Development, Government of India for
strengthening of the training infrastructure and
faculty of the institutions. The NIRD&PR also organises
National Colloquium of State Secretaries of PR & RD
and Heads of SIRD&PRs, in which the training
activities and related issues of the SIRD&PRs and ETCs
are discussed and appropriate corrective measures
are initiated. NIRD&PR also organises capacity
development programmes for the faculty of SIRD&PRs
and ETCs through various training programmes.

Rural Technology Development and
Dissemination
As part of the initiatives towards accelerating
development and wide dissemination of appropriate
and affordable technologies for sustainable rural

4

include designshop on development of designs for
community buildings, National Seminar on
sustainable rural housing technologies, 14th Rural
Technology and Crafts Mela Rural Innovators Start up
Conclave (RISC) and number of training programmes
on various technologies to promote livelihoods.

Special Projects and Resource Cells
Special Projects and Resource Cells Resource Cells
have been established at NIRD&PR with a view to
facilitating the special initiatives of Ministry of Rural
Development. These include Project Cell on Rural
Self-Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs),
Resource Cells on National Rural Livelihood Mission
(NRLM), Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya
Yojana (DDU-GKY) and S.R. Sankaran Chair.
The RSETI project cell of the Institute is the nodal
agency for infrastructure creation for RSETIs in the
States in collaboration with banking organisations.
As part of it, NIRD&PR is given the responsibility of

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

processing the proposals from various sponsoring
banks for release of the funds provided by MoRD for
building infrastructure.

programme delivery managers whose induction is

The Resource Cell for NRLM is to facilitate capacity
building and research activities for promotion of rural
livelihoods. The Cell organises training programmes,
workshops and seminars on NRLM at NIRD&PR, State
Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs) and other
institutions in different States.

completed so far have got placement in various

Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana
(DDU-GKY) is a skill training and placement
programme of the Ministry of Rural Development
(MoRD) with focus on rural youth. NIRD&PR is one of
the Central Technical Support Agencies (CTSA) and
national level coordinating agency for policy advocacy
and administering the Standard Operating
Procedures. It is envisioned to play a central role in
providing training and implementation support to
States and Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs).

Thirteenth batch of the programme commenced

S.R. Sankaran Chair on Rural Labour was established
by the Institute in 2012 with the funding support of
MoRD, GoI. The main objective of the Chair is to
promote research on issues that would enhance
understanding and help in improving the conditions
of rural labour.

Academic Programmes
The major on-going initiatives for rural development

vital to the success of the rural development
programmes. All the students of the PGDRDM batches
organisations. The Twelfth batch of PGDRDM
of 43 students including five in-service international
candidates from CIRDAP and AARDO membercountries like Fiji, Vietnam, Myanmar, Afghanistan
and Thailand started in August, 2016. The
in January 2017.
In furtherance of the Institute’s initiative for wider
outreach, a Distance Education Cell (DEC) was
established in the year 2010 and a one-year PG
Diploma in Sustainable Rural Development (PGDSRD)
was introduced. The Eighth Batch commenced
in January, 2016 and 184 students were admitted. To
address the need for developing a well-trained set
of specialised tribal development professionals, the
Institute also started a one-year Post Graduate
Diploma Programme in Tribal Development
(PGDTDM) in distance mode in January, 2013. The Fifth
batch of the programme commenced from January,
2016 and 40 students were admitted. Besides, Post
Graduate Diploma Programme on Geo-spatial
Technology Application in Rural Development
(PGDGARD) was started in August, 2015. The First
batch of the programme commenced from August
2016 and 124 students were admitted.

have created demand for professionals. Keeping this
in view, NIRD&PR started management education
programme of one-year duration in 2008 in the form
of Post Graduate Diploma in Rural Development
Management (PGDRDM). The aim of the programme
is eventually to create a large pool of professional

New Initiatives
In addition to training, research and other activities
as above NIRD&PR has undertaken special initiatives
during 2016-17. These include orientation
programmes on Cashless Transactions for Master

5

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Hon'ble Union Minister for Rural Development,
Shri Chaudhary Birender Singh launching Training Management Portal, Smart Meeting System and Rural Connect.

Trainers and national Resource Persons of States, a
National Seminar on ‘Equity, Access & Inclusion Transforming Rural India through Financial Inclusion’,
Conclaves on 'Farmer Producer Organisations: The
Journey so far and Road Ahead' and 'Land Rights and
Changing Agrarian Relations, Challenges of Livelihoods
and Economic Diversification in Rural India'. Besides,
with a view to encouraging innovations / technologies
relevant to rural development, a Rural Innovators Startup Conclave (RISC) was conducted during the year.
As part of efforts to further strengthen the IT
applications in various systems and operations of
NIRD&PR, Training Management Portal (TMP), Smart
Meeting System (SMS) and Rural Connect (RC) were
launched by the Hon’ble Union Minister for Rural
Development.

6

Documentation and Information
Dissemination
NIRD&PR has a mandate to disseminate information
on rural development. The Institute continued its
efforts in publishing literature on rural development
issues during the year. As a leading publisher of rural
development literature in India, NIRD&PR
endeavours to share its research findings, observed
field realities and views on issues of current topical
importance with policy planners, academics and
others through its regular publications, occasional
papers, etc. The quarterly “Journal of Rural
Development” published by the Institute occupies a
place of pride among leading academic journals on
rural development and decentralised governance.
NIRD&PR Newsletter ‘Pragati’ in English and Hindi is
published to provide wide publicity to training

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

programmes and highlight various activities
undertaken by the Institute on a regular basis. The
Institute is publishing a Quarterly Newsletter of Rural
Self-Employment Training Institutions (RSETIs)
namely “Enterprise”, covering news from various
RSETIs across the country. Additionally, the Institute
brings out more publications under research report
series, case study series and action research series.
The Institute houses a library with a rich collection of
1,16,277 books on rural development and allied
aspects. The library subscribes to various online
databases relating to rural development and allied
aspects. The rural development database maintained
in the library consists of over two lakh references.

NIRD&PR North Eastern Centre
Guwahati
The North-Eastern Regional Centre of NIRD&PR was
established in 1983 at Guwahati with a view to
orienting training and research activities to the
specific needs of North-Eastern States of India. During
2016-17, 87 training programmes were conducted
involving 3028 participants, that included 70
programmes on campus and 17 off-campus
programmes at SIRDs and other Institutions in the
region. Altogether 18 studies were taken up during
the year under different categories namely research

Shri J. S. Mathur, Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, and Shri Amarjeet Sinha, Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development,
Government of India on visit to Rural Technology Park of NIRD&PR.

7

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

studies, case studies, collaborative studies and that
of action research and village adoption. Five studies
have been completed and remaining 13 are under
progress.

Administration and Finance
Administration and Finance wings of NIRD&PR
support and facilitate faculty members in undertaking
training, research and consultancy activities of the
Institute. The Institute’s policies and strategies are
determined by General Council. Hon’ble Union
Minister for Rural Development is the President of
the Council. The Management and Administration of
the Institute is vested in Executive Council with
Secretary, Rural Development as its Chairman. The
Director General is the CEO and is responsible for
management of the Institute. The Academic and

8

Research Advisory Committees help plan the training,
research, action research and consultancy and
academic activities. Based on the recommendations
of Dr. Y K Alagh Committee, the Institute has been
restructured into Schools having centres within each
School. Major recruitments were undertaken during
the year. As part of Celerbations of the Foundation
Day various events were organised during the month
of November, 2016.
The functions of the Finance and Accounts division
of the Institute inter alia, include budgeting, drawal
of funds, accounting, classification of receipts &
payments. preparation & compilation of Annual
Accounts, submission of audited annual accounts to
the Ministry in addition to rendering financial advice
on various matters relating to administration /
training / projects for decision making by the
Management.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER- 2

TRAINING
Training plays a pivotal role in capacity building for
rural development and panchayati raj. NIRD&PR has
expertise and good infrastructure to train senior and
middle level development officials and elected
representatives of PRIs engaged in policy
formulation, management and implementation of
rural development programmes. The programmes are
intended to create knowledge base, develop skills
and infuse right attitude and values among the
participants of training programmes. The focus is on
the needs of development professionals for
management of on-going initiatives for rural
development effectively and efficiently. The
Institute could facilitate a high level of satisfaction of
participants by evolving and adopting new training
methods and techniques on a continuous basis. It has
led to improvement in the quality of training
programmes while making them more need-based
and focused. Besides, the findings of research studies
and action research studies, village adoption studies
and case studies are utilised in the training
programmes as training inputs. Further, these training
programmes have attracted a significant number of

international participants across the world particularly
from developing countries of Asia, South America and
Africa. As part of this endeavour, training programmes
addressing various capacity building needs in respect
of poverty alleviation and rural development
programmes are organised. With a view to reaching
out training programmes for fucnctionaries at cutting
edge levels the Institute organises regional offcumpus and networking programmes in collaboration
with respective State Institutes of Rural Development
and Panchayati Raj (SIRD&PR) and Extention Training
Centres (ETCs). Faculty Development and Training of
Trainers’ Programmes are part of the mandate to
help and build training capacities of its link institutions
i.e. SIRD&PRs and ETCs.
During 2016-17, the Institute saw an all-time high
number of training programmes (1463) and also
participants (47,683). The average score of effectiveness
of training programmes from the feedback of the
participants was 85 per cent. The type of programmes
organised during the year are shown in Table1.

9

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Table 1 : Type of Programmes Organised: 2016-17
Type

NIRD&PR

NIRD&PR-NERC

Total

Training Programmes

254

62

316

Workshops & Seminars

63

9

72

International Programmes

25

Off-Campus Programmes

143

Networking Programmes

890

Total

1375

Details of programmes conducted and categories of
participants at Headquarters and North- Eastern
Regional Centre at Guwahati are given in AnnexuresI to III. A brief account of the training programmes is
given below:

25
17

160
890

88

1463

Clientele Groups
Training programmes cater to different clientele
groups engaged in rural development. These include:
¾

Officials associated with implementation of
Rural Development & Panchayati Rraj (RD&PR)
programmes

The programmes of the Institute are designed with
the following objectives:

¾

Elected members of Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs) and their functionaries

Build awareness, improve skills and broaden
knowledge of the development functionaries
for effective programme planning and
implementation;

¾

Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs)

¾

Financial Institutions (FIs)

¾

Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)

Develop strategies on emerging needs of rural
population through Workshops, Seminars and
Consultations;

¾

Academicians

¾

International participants

Objectives of Training

z

z

z

Facilitate attitudinal changes among
development personnel.

Training Methods

z

Familiarise the development functionaries
with best practices and success stories in
managing development programmes

Keeping in view the varied nature of the training
imparted and profile of participants attending the
programmes, various training methods are used.
Some of these methods are as follows:

10

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

¾

Lecture-cum-Discussions

¾

Case Studies

¾

Group Discussions

¾

Panel Discussions

¾

Exercises and Hands-on Sessions

¾

Role plays and Simulation Games

¾

Field visits

As part of the training methodology, presentations
by the resource persons, both in-house and external
and sharing of experiences and interactions among
the participants are facilitated. Field exposure visits
to on-going developmental programmes form
important part of the methods. These will help the
participants to get exposed to the best practices and
success stories so that they can think of replicating
the same in the back-home situations.

(PRIs), rural credit management, drinking water and
sanitation, natural resource management, gender
budgeting, applications of GIS and ICT technologies
for rural development, etc. These apart, orientation
and other programmes are planned on the new
initiatives, namely, Saansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana
(SAGY) and Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM).
Important themes of training programmes organised
during 2016-17 are as follows
¾

Panchayati Raj
z

Process and Methodology for Developing
Gram Panchayat Development Plan

z

Gram Panchayat Based Integrated District
Planning

z

Integration of Rural Development
programmes in GPDP

z

Strengthening of PRIs and improving their
Governance through Continuous Capacity
Building

z

Financial Management in PRIs

z

Best Practices in Local Governance

Themes of Training
The overall aim of the programmes is to facilitate
sustainable rural development integrating social,
economic and environmental dimensions through
empowerment of rural people. Themes have been
planned keeping in view the capacity building needs
of development professionals in the context of
emerging rural scenarios. The focus is on effective
planning and management of on-going rural
development flagship programmes.
The main themes include convergence in MGNREGA,
promotion of rural livelihoods and micro enterprises,
social audit, decentralised planning, good
governance through panchayati raj institutions

¾

¾

Rural Employment
z

Convergence of MGNREGS Works for
Strengthening Rural Livelihoods

z

Poverty and Inequality Estimation

z

Social Audit and Social Accountability

Rural Livelihoods
z

Strategies for Development of Rural
Livelihoods

11

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

z

¾

z

Monitoring and Evaluation of Rural
Livelihoods

z

Accelerating Farm based livelihoods

z

Planning and Management of MicroEnterprises for SHGs

¾

¾

Social Development
z

Social Security for Unorganised Workers

z

Planning and Management of Social Security
Programmes

Application of Technologies
ICT Applications for Management of Rural
Development Programmes

z

ICT Applications and e-Governance

Training Programmes on Rural Technologies
and Enterpreunership development for
Youth

z

Prototype Houses under Pradhan Mantri
Awas Yojana - Gramin (PMAY-G)

z

Sustainable Rural Housing Technologies

z

Exposure programmes on Rural
Technologies for youth, women and rural
poor

z

Geo Informatics and Modern Survey
Techniques for Planning & Management of
PMGSY

z

Training for Self-employment under DDUGKY

z

Geospatial Technologies for Monitoring of
IWMP projects

Skill and Enterpreunership Development

Rural Credit
z

Induction Training for Agricultural Field
Officers of Dena Bank

z

Credit flow to the Fisheries sector

z

Investment Credit in Agriculture sector

Natural Resource Management
z

z

12

¾

z

z

¾

Participatory Tools and Techniques for
Planning and Management of Livelihoods

Water Resources Management for
Sustainable Development
Management of Water Resources in OverExploited Areas

z

Participatory Irrigation Management

z

Sustainable Development : EnvironmentFriendly Strategies

¾

Others
z

Land Rights and Legal Empowerment of
Grassroot Stakeholders

z

Public Private Partnership
Entrepreneurship Development

z

Participatory Management of Rural
Development Programmes

z

Participatory Rural Appraisal Methods and
Techniques for District Planning

z

Gender Sensitisation and Prevention of
Sexual Harassment at Workplace

z

Behaviour Change Communication for SBM

z

Faculty Development of SIRDs and ETCs on
Training and Research Methodologies

for

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Themes of Workshops and Seminars
z

Designing Curriculum on Social Accountability
Tools for Good Governance

z

Transforming India: Role of NIRD&PR

z

Social Audit Capacity-building plan

z

Gender Budgeting in Rural Development

z

Development Challenges of Transgender
People in Rural Areas

Regional Off-Campus Training
Programmes
In order to meet the State-specific requirements in
the field of rural development and panchayati raj and
to build the capacities of the faculty members of
SIRDs, ETCs and other RD and PR institutions, 160 offcampus programmes were organised by NIRD&PR and
its regional centres. Besides, with a view to
facilitating capacity building of functionaries at
cutting edge level, 890 networking programmes
through these institutions were also held.
The focus of these training programmes was on areas
such as: Decentralised Planning, Micro Enterprise
Development, Rural Technologies, Natural Resources
Management, Rural Marketing, Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(MGNREGA), Prime Minister Gram Swaraj Yojana
(PMGSY), Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP), Prime Minister Awas Yojana
(PMAY), National Social Assistance Programme
(NSAP), National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM),
Transparency & Accountability, E-Governance,
Geographical Information System (GIS), Convergence,

Organisational Behaviour and Inter-Personal Skills,
Project Management, Weaker Sections, Minorities,
Women, Children and Disabled, Innovations in Rural
Development, Disaster Management and Training of
Trainers, amongst other programmes.

Sponsored Programmes
In addition to the regular programmes, NIRD&PR also
organises programmes sponsored by various
Ministries of Government of India, State
Government and International Organisations. The
main themes of the programmes organised during:
A. National Programmes
z

Integrated Cluster Action Plans Preparation
(ICAP) for Southern Region under RURBAN
Project

z

Preparation of District Irrigation Plan under
PMKSY

z

Training of Trainers of Bare Foot Technicians

z

NIRD&PR-UNICEF Programme on Social Norms
Enabled Transformation

z

Decennial Performance Assessment of
MGNREGS

z

Investment Credit in Agriculture sector

z

Convergence of Plan programmes for Officials
of Government of Odisha

z

Social Audit in ICDS

z

Water Resources Management for Sustainable
Development

z

Unnat Bharat Abhiyan

z

Capacity Building for Field Functionaries on
PMKSY under Watershed Development using
Geo-informatics Technology

13

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

z

Orientation of the Chairpersons and Vice
Chairpersons of Jharkhand on Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj

z

Master Assessors Workshop on Certification of
Master Resource Persons

B. International Programmes
As part of the effort to share Indian experience for
the benefit of developing countries, the Institute has
been organising International training programmes
on different themes of rural development. These
programmes are conducted under Indian Technical
Economic Cooperation ( ITEC) & Special
Commonwealth African Assistance Programme
(SCAAP) Fellowship Schemes of Ministry of External
Affairs, Government of India and as part of
collaborative programmes of MoRD, NIRD&PR and
Centre for Integrated Rural Development for Asia and
the Pacific (CIRDAP). During 2016-17, 25 International
programmes were organised and 500 participants
from developing countries attended the
programmes. The participants were drawn from Asian
and African countries such as Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Zimbabwe, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Mauritius,
Malaysia, Tanzania, Myanmar, Egypt, Yemen, Sudan,
Iran, Ethiopia, Ghana, South Africa, Nigeria, Vietnam,
etc. The details of programmes and participants are
as given below.

i. ITEC and SCAAP Fellowship
Programmes of Ministry of External
Affairs, Govt. of India
z

Community Based Disaster Management :
Mainstreaming and Risk Reduction Strategies

z

Rural Credit for Poverty Reduction

z

Empowerment of Women for Rural
Development

z

Participatory Rural Development

z

Good Governance for Management of Rural
Development Programmes

z

Planning and Management of Drinking Water
and Sanitation Projects

z

Natural Resource Management for Sustainable
Rural Livelihoods
Planning and Management of Rural Housing
and Habitat Projects

z

z

Planning and Management of Rural
Development Programmes

z

Sustainable Agricultural Strategies for Rural
Development

z

Corporate Social Responsibility in Community
Development
Community Driven Rural Development

z
z

Geo-informatics Applications in Rural
Development

International Programmes: 2016-17
S.No.

Category

No. of Programmes

No. of Participants

1

ITEC & SCAAP

18

378

2

MoRD-NIRD&PR-CIRDAP

4

64

3

Others (APO, CICTAB, Mozambique)

3

58

Total

25

500

14

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Management of Rural Employment Projects and
Poverty Alleviation

z

Training Methodology for Development
Professionals
Information Communication Technology for
Rural Development

z

z

z

Participatory Planning for Poverty Reduction
and Sustainable Development

z

Local Governance, Social Accountability and
Good Governance Tools

ii. MoRD-NIRD&PR-CIRDAP
Collaborative Programmes
z

Social Audit in Rural Development Programmes

z

Smart Agriculture

z

Rural Technology

z

Human Resource Development for Rural
Development

iii. Others
Exposure Visit of Mozambique Delegation

z

z
z

z

Exposure visit of Mozambique Delegation
Management of Rural Financing Institutions and
Cooperatives for Rural Development sponsored
by Sponsored by Centre for International
Cooperation in Agricultural Banking (CICTAB)
Tools and Techniques for Improving
Productivity of Micro and Small Agro Food
Processing Business sponsored by Asian
Productivity Organisations (APO)

Profile of Participants of Overall
Training Programmes
As evident from Table 2, and Pie diagram, majority of
the participants of the training programmes were
government officials. A sizable number of participants
were from Research and Training Institutions, NGOs,
CBOs and PRIs. Significant increase has been noticed
in the number of international participants and
participants from financial institutions.
Distribution of participants State-wise as given below
indicates that a majority of the participants were
drawn from the States of Telangana, Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Assam and Rajasthan ranging
between 2400 and 6000.

Table -2: Profile of Participants: 2016-17
S.No

Category

1
2
3
4
5

Government Officials
Financial Institutions
PRIs
NGOs & CBOs
National and State Institutes
for Research and Training
Universities and Colleges
International Participants
Others
Total
Women

6
7
8

Main Campus

Regional Centre (NERC)

Total

%

17522
398
465
4966

1077
62
151
94

18599
460
616
5060

39.01
0.96
1.29
10.61

8071
193
500
12540
44655
14719

1289
67
0
288
3028
950

9360
260
500
12828
47683
15669

19.63
0.55
1.05
26.90
100.00
32.86

15

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Profile of Participants: 2016-17

Distribution of Participants State wise

16

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Training Performance Over the Years
The training performance during the past four years
starting from 2013-14 is depicted in the figure given
below. As evendent from the figure, the performance
has consistently improved over the years. There was
an increase of 29.5 per cent in number of training
programmes and 50.7 per cent in number of trainees
during 2016-17 compared to 2013-14. In comparision
with previous year (2015-16) the increase during
2016-17 in terms of number of programmes and
trainees accounts to 10.3 per cent and 26.7
respectively. The substantial increase is mainly an
account of increased focus on training on flagship
programmes specially MGNREGA and close coordination and monitoring by the NIRD&PR. Filling
up of vacancies at top management level i.e., Director
General is also one of the contributing factors in terms

of effective leadership and spearheading the
activities.

Training Performance - School-wise
The training performance of different Schools of the
Institute is indicated in the following chart. It will be
seen that the School on Rural Livelihoods has
organised more number of programmes vis-a-vis
other Schools. These programmes mainly related to
MGNREGA which was the focus of capacity
building programmes taken up by the Institute during
2016-17.

Training on Geo-informatics
Applications in Rural Development
Geo-informatics Technology has got huge potential
in terms of gathering precise geo-spatial data on real

Training Performance : 2013-17

17

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Training performance - School-wise*

* 502 programmes were organised under Special Projects and Resource Cells.
and temporal mode on various features on the ground
relating to development programmes, which has
great relevance in the rural development planning,
monitoring and modelling and enhancing technical
skills and capacity building of field functionaries,
project directors, PRIs, Policy Makers, etc. The Centre
for Geo-Informatics Application in Rural
Development (C-GARD) of the Institute works for
design and development of Geospatial Technologies
and their applications. The Centre designs specific
customised training programmes in Geo-informatics
Technology Applications in areas related to planning,
monitoring, modelling, and decision support systems
on Watershed, MGNREGS, PMGSY, PMKSY Rural
Energy, Agriculture Development, Environmental
Impact Assessment, Conservation Practices,

18

Resources Planning, Infrastructure Development, and
Village Planning, etc. Six GIS Facility Centres are
established viz., in Assam, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Odisha States, for promoting
the use of scientific information derived from
satellites, GPS and GIS technologies in rural
development programmes.
As an endeavour to strengthen India partnership with
Africa, Government of India had approved
establishment of C-GARD Centres in five countries of
Africa viz. Kenya, Algeria, Niger, Equatorial Guinea
and Madagascar in a phased manner. Based on the
approval accorded by the Government of India, steps
have been taken to operationalise the process of
establishment of C-GARD Centres in these countries.
The C-GARD Madagascar Technology Centre is in the

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

process of being established. A MoRD Sponsored
Centre for Information Techlology (CIT) and CGARD
Centres have been established in Centre on
Integrated Rural Development for Asia and Pacific
(CIRDAP), Dhaka, Bangladesh, for the CIRDAP
Member Countries.

Corporate Social Responsibility for
Rural Development
India has a long tradition of social responsibility
through community initiatives taken-up by the
Corporates and Business houses that include
religious, educational, health, sanitation and other
allied areas of social development. New
Companies Act, 2013 has mandated the Corporate
Social Responsibility (CSR) and pronounced that
profitable companies will have to spend at least 2
per cent of their average net profit over the
preceding three years on CSR activities as specified
in Schedule VII of the said Act. To fuel the engine
of inclusive development, an organic bonding is
required between the Corporates, Government
Development Departments, Voluntary Agencies

The Centre provides services on consultancy basis in
the form of specific training and various research
studies on demand from Public Sector Undertakings,
Corporate Houses and National and International
service organisations. Many Executives are trained
through national level programmes for the public
sector undertakings such as HCL, BHEL, NMDC, ONGC,
IOC, Airports Authority of India, Cochin Shipyard
Corporation etc., on CSR in Rural Development.
Besides, a four-week International Training
programme on Corporate Social Responsibility in
Rural Development for the developing economies is
also organised.
During 2016-17, the Centre has organised specialised
programmes on Corporate Social Responsibilities in
Sustainable Rural Livelihoods, Entrepreneurship
Development Strategies and Public Private
Partnership, Participatory Approaches on inclusive
development, etc. Besides, the Centre also conducted
National level Conclave and Seminar on Corporate
Social Responsibilities in Rural Development. As part
of research, the centre is conducting various impact
assessment studies, baseline surveys and need based
analysis also is being done from time to time.

and Panchayati Raj Institutions at all levels and
such conjoined efforts could give boost to the

Exposure Visits

upliftment of rural poor. With this background, the

Exposure visits for sharing Indian experience has also
been part of the activities of the Institute over the
years. During the period under reference, delegations
from Mozambique, UNICEF, Namibian, Willington CL,
Ivory Coast West Africa Ambassador, Professors from
Cardinal Stritch University, USA, Metropolitan
reclamation district of Grater Chicago, USA visited
NIRD&PR and exchanged notes and explored for
possible collaboration.

NIRD&PR has established a centre for ‘Corporate
Social Responsibility, Public- Private Partnership
and Peoples Action’ (CSR, PPP & PA). The Centre
functions as ‘Nodal Point’ for all stakeholders by
engaging in policy dialogue and advocacy for better
involvement of those players towards inclusive
development of the country.

19

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Training Quality Improvement
Measures Committee (TQIMC)

point scale with reference to important components
such as training design, context, training methods,
training materials, speakers’ effectiveness, boarding

In order to make the training more effective,
measures to improve the qualitative aspects of the
NIRD&PR training programmes have always been the
priority of the Institute. In this regard, a School-wise
Training Quality Improvement Measures Committee
was constituted with members drawn from internal
and external subject experts to securitise the course
design and materials and offer suggestive measures.
The Committee meets once in a quarter and suggests
the required measures for improvement of
programmes to be organised in the ensuing month.

Training Feedback and Impact
Assessment
At the end of each training programme, effectiveness
of training is evaluated through e-evaluation on a five-

20

and lodging facilities, library facilities, etc., so as to
take steps to improve the training programmes. The
overall average score for the training programmes
organised during 2016-17 was 85 per cent.
In addition to the above evaluation, impact of the
programmes is made with a view to assessing the
post-training utilisation and application of the
learnings from the training programmes. A third party
evaluation is commissioned to undertake the
assessment in order to have objective feedback.
During 2016-17, Impact evaluation was initiated on
the Training Programmes held during the last year
engaging the services of the Institute of Rural
Management, Anand. The evaluation report will be
available in the year 2017-18.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER - 3

RESEAR
CH
RESEARCH
Research is one of the principal endeavours of
NIRD&PR in view of its foray into wide range of issues
pertaining to rural development. The research
activities undertaken enable us to understand
emerging rural development issues arising from time
to time. Besides addressing contemporary issues,
research also aims to focus on current best practices
in the area of rural development. The research
activities also aim at bringing out appropriate insights
for discussion in training programmes conducted by
the Institute. Thus, in overall perspective, NIRD&PR
research enables the building of database on rural
development interventions, successful interventions
and analysis of wide range of socio-economic
conditions with a view to coming up with alternative
measures and so on. The research endeavours enable
the Institute to keep abreast with the contemporary
issues of rural development in the country. Given the
wide range of experience and exposure in the area
of rural development among the faculty members,
the Institute undertakes consultancy research studies
for various other Ministries of Government of India,
State Governments, Corporate Organisations on

various issues as desired by them in respect of rural
development. Keeping vast perspectives of rural
development and keeping in view the importance of
research activities in this regard, a systematic
approach is adopted by the Institute. The following is
the brief description on approach adopted for
research activities in the Institute.

Objectives
The research studies are conducted with the
following objectives:
z

Understanding the changing rural socioeconomic scenario with focus on Rural
Development Flagship Programmes

z

Identifying
major
constraints
in
implementation of Rural Development
programmes

z

Suggesting suitable policy and programme
interventions for improving the overall
performance of RD programmes

21

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Developing course material for training
programmes based on research outcome

z

Creating body of knowledge in Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj domains

z

Research Themes & Focused Areas
Keeping in view the changing socio-economic
conditions and the implementation of various
development interventions, the themes of research
undergo changes from time to time. The focus of
research undertaken during the reporting period i.e.
2016-17 was on the following themes:

z

Promotion of Rural Technologies

z

Local Self-governing Institutions and Processes
thereof

z

Equity and Social Development Issues

z

Provisions for Weaker Sections

z

Disaster Management

Categories of Research
Keeping in view the quality and quantitative issues
to be addressed, NIRD&PR research was undertaken
through three broad categories and these were:-

z

Rural Livelihoods

i.

Research Projects/Studies

z

Rural Infrastructure

ii.

Case Studies

z

Rural Credit

iii.

Collaborative Studies

z

Natural Resource Management

z

Good Governance

z

Geo-informatics and ICT Applications in Rural
Development

z

Poverty Alleviation

z

Human Resources

The first category of Research Studies are especially
those studies which are undertaken on macro-level
issues and also participated by more than one faculty
member. The case studies are basically focused on
successful rural development practices having
specific training value. The collaborative studies are
especially undertaken through faculty members of
SIRDPRs / ETCs and National Institutions like IITs, IIMs,
IIPA, CSD, ASCI, IIFM, etc.

z

Rural Employment and related issues

z

Land Reforms and Agrarian Relations

z

Social Audit

z

Skill Training and Self-Employment

z

Gender Relations through Development
Interventions

22

Research Tools and Techniques
Sample surveys, structured interviews, case studies,
participatory learning approaches consisting of PRA
techniques, content analysis, qualitative assessments
and impact analysis, are a few of the research tools
and techniques adopted for the research studies.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Process of Conducting Research
A systematic approach is adopted while undertaking
the research studies on various themes identified.
At the initial stage, the faculty members at centre's
level are involved in a consultation under the
guidance of head of the centre concerned. Based on
the internal discussions held, the research proposals
then are presented before Research Advisory Group
for wider discussion and seeking suggestions. After
the presentation before the Group, the proposals are
referred to Research Advisory Committee for
comments and suggestions. The revised research
proposals are then forwarded to Director General for
approval. In regard to research studies under the
category of SIRDPR/Collaborative Institutions’
studies, the proposals are referred to an internal
committee of subject experts consisting of senior
faculty members for their comments and
observations. On incorporation of suggestions, the
proposals are then accorded approval by Director
General for conducting the research studies.

Quality Control Measures
Besides the Research Advisory Committee (RAC),
several measures are also undertaken to ensure
quality of research outcome. After completion of the
study, the draft report concerned is presented in the
Study Forum for wider discussion. Based on the
suggestions, the final version of the research report
emerged. At the time of publication, the research
reports are referred to external subject-experts for
their comments so as to ensure quality research
outcome.

RAC Meeting

Research Studies Conducted:2016-17
In all 104 research studies were taken up during the
year 2016-17 under different categories viz., Research
Studies, Case Studies and Collaborative Studies. Out
of these, 78 research studies were initiated during
the year. These included 48 studies in collaboration
with SIRDs, ETCs and National Institutions. Of these,
16 studies were specially focussed on MGNREGA. The
details of studies are given in Annexure-IV.
During 2016-17, 11 research studies were completed
(Annexure-V). These studies were carried out in the
States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and West
Bengal.
Since the span of research studies undertaken cuts
across the financial year, the studies completed
during the year under reference consisted of studies
initiated during the previous years as well as
the studies taken up in the current year. The 15
studies of previous years, as per their time-frame,

23

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Figure 1: Categories of Research Studies taken up during 2016-17

distribution system, access of market,
maintenance of burial ground, provision of
employment, selection of beneficiaries under
various welfare schemes.There are some cases
where panchayats have taken initiatives to
ensure better service delivery or promote
development in a systematic manner.

are still going-on and the details are presented in
Annexure-VI.

Salient features/important
learnings of completed studies
z

24

A study on participatory decentralised planning
and inclusive development of marginalised
sections was conducted in Madhya Pradesh,
West Bengal, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. It put
forth that all the GPs in the study regions
improved the performance level due to the
effective people’s participation which enable
to maintaining transparency and accountability
in delivering services like provision of drinking
water, street light, electricity, connectivity,
housing for houseless, education for all,
anganwadi for the young children, public

z

Furthermore, many award winning panchayats
in Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu
and Karnataka by default developed
infrastructures and delivered better services
till the period of getting Awards. But later few
panchayats sustained and created self-reliance,
which further gained a number of incentives in
the form of funds and peoples support while
few panchayats could not sustaine the
achievement and thus slipped down in delivery

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

of quality services. Political conflicts, local
litigations and lack of contributions by various
stakeholders were observed in project areas.
An important change witnessed in the rural
scene after poverty alleviation or rural
development programmes was that the poor
people who never had any voice in the
functioning of the village institutions, now are
taking active part in these village institutions.
z

z

z

A comparative study of Godavari and Cauvery
Delta Zones on tenancy arrangements reveals
that tenant farming community is very fragile
and worst affected in Godavari zone. The
farmers without any legal documentation are
facing problems under oral / informal tenancy
or share cropping. There is no proper
documentary evidence on number of tenants
and extent of land under tenancy system at
village and Mandal office level. Absentee land
owners are prevalent on a considerable scale
in Godavari Delta region. This would act as a
natural constraint on agricultural growth as
there would be no new investment in
agriculture.
The tenants and the agricultural workers were
left with no land of their own even to have their
own house in Cauvery delta during the colonial
times. The wage level was low but the rent level
was high. Landless population was thus
perennially squeezed and oppressed. The
labourers were tied down to the land owners.
Though the colonial state brought about some
reforms in terms of land revenue policy and
banned the slavery, the exploitative relations
continued.
The Central and State governments have been
trying to come up with new policies towards

land leasing to benefit the owner as well as
tenants equally to create a congenial
atmosphere in agricultural sector.
z

A recommendation from the Godavari and
Cauvery Delta Zones study is that village
community needs to constitute a committee
which can be responsible for enrolling the
details of tenants, issuing certificates and see
that they get Loan Eligibility Card and other
benefits from government. The committee
should be given powers to constitute terms and
conditions in tenancy market in village level.

z

A study on IAY beneficiary households
conducted in the six States of Assam, Bihar,
Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and
Gujarat revealed that majority of the IAY houses
have been constructed by the beneficiaries
themselves; have electricity at home and are
metered. The gram panchayat collects nominal
charges from the beneficiaries for a new
connection. The beneficiaries have taken up
new economic activities after the possession
of IAY houses. They have started general shops
or in-house activities attached to their houses.
They were able to have access to some source
of drinking water either tap connected directly
to their house or usage of well / bore well
water.

z

Furthermore, in the above mentioned six
States, improper and ineffective monitoring by
State implementing agencies has been
observed. Physical monitoring needs to be
strengthened to keep track of progress of
construction as well as completion of dwelling
units. Strengthening of the existing credit-

25

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

related products and introduction of new
products to cater to a wider spectrum of housing
needs is essential.
z

Case study on best practices in rural
development in PUNSARI Gram Panchayat in
Gujarat put forth that final disposal of solid
waste collected from households and the waste
water collected through a centralised sewerage
system has not been systematic. The collection
was methodical but the disposal was
haphazard. The GP needs to take action for
proper disposal of waste collected from
households / streets and shops; and for treating
the waste water at the final disposal point
before it is let out into the fields.

z

Case study on process documentation of Social
Audit of IWMP in Chittoor district in Andhra
Pradesh and Medak district in Telangana puts
forth that it is necessary to strengthen
institutions at various levels for enhancing
rejuvenation of natural resources and
economic benefit flows. Dedicated and fulltime officers at State, district and watershed
level is envisaged especially for programmes
like watershed where systematic activities
need to be implemented along with people’s
participation.

Process of social audit

Solid Waste Management

26

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER - 4

ACTION RESEAR
CH AND
RESEARCH
VILL
AGE ADOPTION
VILLA
Action research and Village Adoption take the
researchers much closer to the grassroots problems
and prospects while promoting rural development
endeavours. Action Research endeavours to enrich
the knowledge base among researchers to
understand the issues facilitating rural development
processes. It is taken up in order to test the
implementability and assess the outcomes of policy
recommendations of research studies undertaken by
the Institute. Hence, more emphasis has been placed
on this particular category of research studies by
NIRD&PR.
The focus of Action Research of the Institute is to
facilitate the operationalisation of decentralised
development process for emergence of good
governance at local level and to ensure
socio-economic transformation. The ‘facilitation’
process encompasses social mobilisation, technology
transfer for productivity enhancement, value
addition, capacity building through training and nontraining interventions, networking of local

institutions, social development, participatory
decision making, etc. The action research projects are
people-centred and use participatory tools and
techniques to elicit effective participation. Action
Research is carried out in project villages as “social
laboratories” for effective learning of the participants
of training programmes.

Objectives
z

To test the implementability of policy
recommendations of NIRD&PR research
projects and assess the outcomes of such
recommendations;

z

To find out field level solutions to the critical
problems experienced in implementation of
Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation
programmes;

z

To suggest effective strategies for transfer of
technology to tiny producers for enhancing
their incomes; and

27

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

z

To experiment with innovative ideas for
achieving development objectives and for
proposing alternative cost–effective
programme interventions.

Themes and Areas of Action
Research
Given the contemporary research outcomes and the
current issues/problems that need immediate
attention, NIRD&PR focuses upon several themes for
action research. A few of the themes focused upon
during 2016-17 were:
z

Capacity- building and empowerment

z

Value addition to Non-Timber Forest Products
(NTFP)

z

Dairy development

z

Wage employment

z

Disaster management

z

Participatory Planning

z

Application of Geo-informatics technologies

z

Gender

z

Livelihoods promotions

Within the broad themes identified, specific areas
are chosen to undertake action research projects. The
specific focused areas for action research were:
z

Empowerment of SHG members

z

Mobilising and empowering wage seekers
Promotion of participatory planning by using
people - friendly technologies

z

z

z

28

Participatory disaster preparedness and
management
Empowering tribal community through
developing capacities on value addition to NTFP

Categories of Action Research
Studies
Given the experience of NIRD&PR and also based on
micro and macro level focus on action research
studies, there are two types of action research
studies. The first category is conventional action
research with emphasis on larger area as well as wider
range of issues to be covered. The second category is
Village Adoption Studies, wherein the focus is at
micro-level by adopting specific backward village
across the country. Under the second category, instead
of identifying the issues and then pursuing action
research, the faculty members are involved in holistic
development of the village through participatory
approach and strengthen the capacities of the
villagers. The process is then captured through action
research methods to bring out learning experiences
and distinguish the same in terms of typical conditions
prevailing in the village concerned.

Action Research Tools and Techniques
As part of action research, methods like sensitising
the targeted community through personal
interaction, capacity-building and awareness
generation, appropriate skill inculcation and
upgradation, mobilising the community for
participatory action, survey on socio - economic data,
participatory rural appraisal (PRA) techniques for data
collection, focus group discussions (FGDs), process
documentation, etc., are adopted.

Process of Conducting Action Research
Based on the issues identified through formal
research, NIRD&PR faculty identifies their focused
areas of action research intervention. The proposal,

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

then generated, is discussed at internal forum and
then the usual process is adopted as under formal
research.

Action Research Studies
Conducted: 2016-17

implementing the developmental programmes
all the SHG women, school children and youth
were involved with the help of local panchayat
members and school teachers and carried out
all the activities successfully.
z

A pilot initiative in the four villages of Goreswar
Development Block in Baska district of Assam
was conducted in order to understand the
promotion of rural entrepreneurship &
enterprises through livelihoods cluster
approach. It reveals that the potential
livelihood activities were to an extent
organised and were taken to the semicommercialisation stage. However, the
households practising different potential
livelihood activities were yet to learn the
nuances of entrepreneurship and enterprise
building. Based on the strategy and
intervention framework, the action plans for
the potential livelihoods sectors were outlined
for improved farm practices and agribusinesses, animal husbandry activities like pig
rearing and dairy and handloom related
activities.

z

A
study
was
conducted in the
villages of Thanged
Palle in Nalgonda
district
and
Balakistapur
in
Mahabubnagar district in Telangana on rural
artisans and their transformation into rural
enterprises. This study proposed to establish
SHGs of all the potter families and provide
technical and financial support for upgrading
their technology, tools and equipment. Support

During the year, four action research studies were
completed. These studies were carried out in the
States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Tamil Nadu. Five
Action Research studies of previous years are
continued during 2016-17. During 2016-17, one new
study was sanctioned to Extension Training Centre
(ETC), Pukpui, Lunglei, Mizoram titled”Action
Research on Adoption of Pukpui Village in Community
Hygiene and Sanitation”. The details are presented
in Annexure-VII.

Salient features / important
learnings of completed studies
z

As per the Sansaad Adarsh Gram Yojana model,
activities were taken up in three villages of
Ipperu Gram Panchayat, Kudair Mandal,
Anantapur district of Andhra Pradesh. It
focused on key issues like strengthening the
people's skills, creating awareness over various
developmental programmes and arranging skill
training programmes such as tailoring,
embroidery, driving course for unemployed
youth to enhance their skills to start
independent activities to earn additional
income to lead better life. The developmental
activities have been organised into four
dimensions of activities such as Personal
Development, Human Development, Economic
Development and Social Development. In

29

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

for market linkages and exposure to best
practices through visits to modern pottery
production centres and brass metal production
centres in the country.

Village Adoption
In order to demonstrate the application of the models
and implementation mechanisms recommended by
the Institute based on research and action research,
the village-adoption scheme was initiated during
2012-13. The scheme also aimed at promoting
capacities of faculty members to facilitate effective
implementation of rural development and poverty
alleviation prgrammes. The action research
initiatives, specifically undertaken through Village
Adoption Studies, focus principally on the issues of
understanding social dynamics, mobilising
community for collective action; bridging the gap
between development administration and villages;
and facilitate sustainable development. The

endeavour also enables the faculty members to keep
themselves abreast of grassroots realities.

Process of Village Adoption
Faculty members are encouraged to select specific
village/village clusters keeping in view the size of
village and the prevailing typical backwardness
issues.
On selection of village(s), the designated faculty
member is encouraged to study the profile of the
village and the prevailing socio-economic conditions,
etc. With the strength of understanding on the village,
the faculty members facilitate the needful
interventions sourced from local government
agencies.
The list of completed and ongoing Village Adoption
studies during the year 2016-17 is presented in
Annexure-VIII.

Field Photos of Action Research and Village Adoption

30

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER - 5

CONSUL
TANCY STUDIES
CONSULT
Given the expertise available with faculty members
and the wider attention garnered by the Institute,
various Ministries of Government of India and State
Governments, Corporate Sector organisations often
approach NIRD&PR to undertake specific objective
oriented research studies, evaluation studies, etc.
These studies are classified as Consultancy Studies.
A few of the clientele group in this regard are from
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Human
Resources Development, Ministry of Water
Resources, Planning Commission, Government of
Kerala, etc.

The process of undertaking Consultancy studies is
based on the expertise available with each centre of
the Institute. Given the mandate of the study, each
centre undertakes these studies based on the
requests received. During the year 2016-17, five new
consultancy studies were taken up in addition to
continuing the work of nine on-going studies that
were taken up prior to 2016-17. Out of 17 studies
cumulatively, eight were completed while nine
studies are still ongoing. The summary of the status
in given Figure given below. The details of the studies
presented in Annexure-IX. All the 29 States were
covered in different studies.

Status of Consultancy Studies

31

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Salient features / important
learnings of completed studies
z

A study on the adoption of low performance
districts under MGNREGA in Uttar Pradesh
(Bundelkhand region), Assam, Karnataka
(Hyderabad-Karnataka region) and Rajasthan
puts forth that Mahatma Gandhi NREGS being
more demand driven programme, unless the
Job Card holders put-forth their demand for
employment they cannot access requisite
persondays of wage employment.
in Bolangir district, Odisha. It puts forth that
the ration distributed through PDS outlets has
to be monitored thoroughly so that right
quantity of ration reaches the target
population.
z

z

Furthermore, Mahatma Gandhi NREGS
implementation is to be studied with higher
targets of providing at least 150 days of
employment to every Job Card holder; It is even
more ideal to enhance the days of employment to
200 days for a period of at least two years so that
the cash acquired through wages can be utilised to
repayment of loans taken from the agents.

z

A study was conducted on the socio-economic
reasons for migration and impact of
Government programmes on migrant families

32

In order to understand the nutrition and
education status of children between 4-7 years
from women-headed households under
MGNREGA and those not under MGNREGA, a
comparative study was conducted in the six
States of Kerala, West Bengal, Tripura,
Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh.
It revealed that women who were working in
MGNREGS, their contribution in the children’s
educational expenses was significantly higher
compared to women not working in MGNREGS.
Similarly, the improvement in dietary pattern
(intake of different food items) of children was
found better among beneficiary mothers
compared to children of non-beneficiary
mothers. Frequency of consuming food items
in a day was also significantly higher among the
children of mothers working in MGNREGS than
children of mothers not working in MGNREGS.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER – 6

NETWORKING WITH
ST
ATE INSTITUTES OF R
URAL
STA
RURAL
DEVEL
OPMENT AND P
ANCHA
YATI
DEVELOPMENT
PANCHA
ANCHAY
RAJ (SIRD&PR
s) AND EXTENSION
(SIRD&PRs
Cs)
TRAINING CENTRES (ET
(ETC

Training for Rural Development and Panchayati Raj
functionaries has a three-tier institutional setup with
NIRD&PR, SIRD&PRs and ETCs at national, State and
regional levels, respectively. NIRD&PR has a mandate
to strengthen the SIRD&PRs and ETCs so as to build
the capacities of large mass of Rural Development
and Panchayati Raj functionaries through training and
Faculty Development/ Continuing Education. These
efforts are expected to result in improved planning
and implementation of development programmes.
As a part of this networking effort, NIRD&PR has been
organising and coordinating the activities and events
as highlighted in this chapter.

I.

National Colloquium and Regional Workshops
of SIRD&PR s and ETCs

The major functions of NIRD&PR in relation to
networking with SIRD&PRs and ETCs are (a)
Convening Annual Colloquium of SIRD&PRs and ETCs
(b) Conducting Regional Workshops of SIRD&PRs &
ETCs. While the Colloquium facilitates an overview
of the SIRD&PR activities in general, the Regional
workshops serve as a platform for detailed
interaction and networking between NIRD&PR,
SIRD&PRs and ETCs.

33

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

a.

National Colloquium of ETCs

During the year 2016-17, the National Colloquium of
ETCs was held during 2-3 June, 2016 at NIRD&PR,
Hyderabad in association with Ministry of Rural
Development, Government of India. The objectives
of the Colloquium were:
1. To review the existing training capacity of
ETCs vis-à-vis the number of functionaries
to be trained, assess its adequacy, identify
the gaps and suggest measures for greater
coverage with special reference to flagship
programmes of rural development and
Panchayati Raj Ministries;
2. To suggest a standardised complement of
faculty with relevant disciplines that a
typical ETC is expected to have including
measures for capacity building of the faculty
members.
3. To review the existing resource base of the
ETCs and funding support under Central
Sector Scheme and provide feedback on the
revised guidelines of the scheme.
4. To discuss the ETC-related recommendations
of Prof. Y.K Alagh Committee and suggest
measures for their operationalisation.
The Colloquium was chaired by Director General,
NIRD&PR. The Principals/ Heads and Senior Faculty
Members of 56 ETCs, faculty members of NIRD&PR,
officials of MoRD, Government of India, a few
representatives of SIRD&PRs and State Governments
and State Link Officers of NIRD&PR participated in
the deliberations.

34

The main recommendations of the Colloquium
emerging out of discussions, working group reports
and presentations are given at Annexure-X.
b.

Workshop on Academic Initiatives of NIRD&PR
and SIRD&PRs

A Workshop was held on 12.7.2016 under the
Chairmanship of Director General, NIRD&PR with a
view to sharing the initiatives and experiences of
SIRD&PRs as also to review action taken on the
decisions of the National Colloquium of SIRD&PRs
held on 15.6.2015.
As part of deliberations the delegates were briefed
on Sustainable Development Goals: 2030 and
NIRD&PR initiatives such as, India Panchayat
Knowledge Network (IPKN), Establishment of a Web
Based ‘Rural Connect’ Faculty Development
Programmes for SIRD&PRs and ETCs, training and
capacity building programmes contemplated under
NRLM and Deen Dayal Upadhyay Grameen Kausalya
Yojana. The presentations were followed by sharing
of experiences by the representatives of SIRD&PRs
on some of the initiatives relating to training and
research activities and projects being implemented
in action research mode. Initiatives by some of the
SIRD&PRs wise are given below:
z

TPIP&RD, Chhattisgarh: Capacity building of
PRIs.

z

SIRD, Gujarat: The five pillar approach on RD
flagship programmes of MGNREGA, Swachh
Bharat Mission, Natural resources, Watershed
and rural housing

z

HIRD, Haryana: massive training of panchayati
raj functionaries

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

z

HIPA, Himachal: preparation of manuals on
Livelihood and RTI.

z

ANSSIRD, Karnataka: extending SATCOM
facility to all the district, block and GPs.

z

SIRD, Kerala: collaborative research
programmes with the Universities.

z

MGSIRD, MP: use of IT platforms for knowledge
connectivity and material development

z

SIRD, Meghalaya: pilot project on bio-digestive
toilets; CSR projects and entrepreneurship
development programmes.

z

SIRD, Mizoram: Shifting cultivation &
sanitation.

z

SIRD, Nagaland: demand based training
programmes for youth and community.

z

SIRD&PR, Tamil Nadu: GIS Certificate Course

z

TSIPARD, Telangana: sponsored courses

z

DDUSIRD, UP: Action research projects taken
up with funding support from World Bank,
UNDP and other Ministries of Government of
India

c.

Writeshops on ‘State Training Policy and Action
Plan for Training of RD & PR Functionaries’

As part of efforts to systematise training and capacity
building efforts, five Regional Writeshops on
Preparation of State Training Policy and State Training
Plan for Training of RD&PR Functionaries were
organised during the year at NIRD&PR, Hyderabad,
DDU-SIRD, Lucknow (UP), MG-SIRD, Jabalpur (MP),
BRAIPR&RD (West Bengal) and NERC, Guwahati

(Assam). The objectives of the writeshops were to
guide the SIRDs and ETCs in identification of the
training needs of rural development and panchayati
raj functionaries and to prepare Training Policy &
Training Action Plan for the States.
During the Writeshops, participants were facilitated
to analyse the existing scenario and issues in training
and capacity building in respective States and to
develop policy indicating the objectives, target
groups, type of training programmes, training
coverage, institutional mechanisms, etc. Besides, the
approach for funding, networking with institutions
systems at State level for monitoring and evaluation
and development of trainers were also discussed. As
part of preparation of training plan, the training needs
of various target groups at different levels were
identified followed by assessment of the estimated
number of total target groups to be trained,
institutional mechanisms, budget estimates, etc.
The faculty members of SIRD&PRs and ETCs and officials
of the State Governments dealing with capacity
building programmes attended the Writeshops.
II.

NIRD&PR Off-campus Training Programmes at
SIRD&PRs

With a view to strengthening the capabilities of faculty
members of SIRD&PRs, NIRD&PR has evolved a
Scheme for conducting off-campus programmes at
different SIRDs. As per the system in vogue, at the
beginning of the year the programmes to be offered
at each SIRD&PRs is decided by NIRD&PR as per norms
and in consultation with them. The same are included
in NIRD&PR Annual Training Calendar. During the year
under report, NIRD&PR has organised as many as 160
off-campus programmes at different SIRD&PRs across
the country.

35

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

The Off-campus programmes were planned to meet
the emerging training and development needs of
faculty and development functionaries.
III.

NIRD&PR-State Link Officers (SLOs) Scheme

The scheme is in vogue for the last few years. Under
the scheme, the NIRD&PR Faculty Members are
designated as State Link Officers (SLOs) to assist the
States and SIRD&PRs in the context of imparting
training to RD & PR functionaries. The scheme has
been revised with a new set of guidelines and was
extended to cover other fraternity of sub-State level
RD training institutions viz., Extension Training
Centres (ETCs)/Regional Institute of Rural
Developments (RIRDs), Panchayati Raj Training
Centres (PRTCs), District Institute of Rural
Developments (DIRDs), etc., which are working in
different States. The SLOs have been providing
needed academic support to the State
Governments, the SIRDs & ETCs and other RD Training
Institutions in the areas of training, research and
action research.
IV.

Central Scheme for Strengthening of SIRD&PRs
and ETCs

The SIRD&PRs and ETCs are State and regional level
rural development training institutions for imparting
training to the rural development and panchayati raj
functionaries, elected representatives of Panchayati
Raj Institutions and members of SHGs at districts,
block and village levels, respectively. As these
institutions have developed over a period of time,
they remain at different stages of growth in terms of
physical infrastructure, faculty, staff, etc.
The Ministry of Rural Development, under the central
scheme of ‘Management Support to RD Programmes

36

and Strengthening of District Planning System’ has
been extending support to the training activities of
States for effective implementation of Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj programmes by
providing financial support to SIRD&PRs and ETCs. In
this context, the NIRD&PR has been mandated to
channelise the funding support to SIRDs and ETCs by
way of scrutinising the proposals and making
SIRD&PR-ETC-specific recommendations to MoRD to
consider sanction of funding support under the
scheme. As part of scrutiny of the proposals submitted
during 2016-17, the NIRD&PR has made an appraisal
of the institutions in terms of existing infrastructure,
faculty position and training performance during last
three years with special reference to flagship
programmes for rural development and panchayati
raj. Based on the technical scrutiny and appraisal, the
requirements of the institutions for funding were
assessed and recommendations made.
The details of the Scheme are as follows:
a.

Strengthening of State Institutes of Rural
Development & Panchayati Raj (SIRD&PRs)

The SIRD&PRs aim at improving the knowledge, skills
and attitude of rural development functionaries and
elected representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions
at State and district levels. At present, there are 29
SIRD&PRs, one in each State.
The courses conducted by SIRD&PRs include the
Flagship Programmes of MoRD and MoPR, Training
Skills and Methodology for ETCs, Planning and
implementation of RD projects, Rural Credit,
Computer Information System for RD, Courses for
BDOs, Voluntary Organisations, Management
Development Programmes, Integrated Watershed
Development, etc.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

100 per cent Central assistance is provided by MoRD
to SIRD&PRs for Non-Recurring expenditure for
strengthening of infrastructure development
including campus development works, procurement
of teaching aids, office equipment and furniture &
fixtures.
The MoRD is providing 50 per cent of the recurring
expenditure to the SIRD&PRs in ‘non - North-East
States’ and 90 per cent of the recurring expenditure
to the SIRD&PRs in ‘North-East States’. In addition,
100 per cent reimbursement of expenditure on the
salaries of five core faculty members is provided by
MoRD to all SIRD&PRs, on year to year basis.
During the year 2016-17, 16 SIRD&PRs have submitted
the Non-Recurring Grant proposals seeking funding
support for development of physical and training
infrastructure (buildings including campus
development works, teaching aids and office
equipment, Furniture & Fixtures, etc.) and
procurement of training-aids. The proposals
submitted by them were scrutinised by NIRD&PR with
reference to Central Scheme guidelines and were
recommended to MoRD for consideration.
b.

Strengthening of Extension Training Centres
(ETCs)

The Extension Training Centres (ETCs) are the subState level Training Institutions to impart training to
the rural development functionaries and elected
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions at
Block and GP levels. There are 89 ETCs established
and upgraded all over the country. They have been
conducting courses with focus on Flagship
Programmes of MoRD & MoPR. In addition, the ETCs
are conducting courses for V illage Extension

Officers, Gram Sevaks, Sevikas, Secretaries of
Panchayats and Co-operatives and grassroots level
functionaries of development departments.
Besides, the ETCs are imparting training to the
elected representatives of PRIs at block and GP level
and to members of SHGs and other community based
organisations.
Consequent upon increase in the number of
developmental functionaries and the need for
providing training to large number of elected
representatives and members of Panchayati Raj
institutions, the ETCs have acquired an added
significance. Central assistance to ETCs is provided
by MoRD @ 100 per cent for non-recurring and up to
a maximum of ` 20.00 lakh per ETC per annum for
recurring expenditure to enable them to cope with
increased training load for capacity building of RD &
PR functionaries and PRI members.
During 2016-17, 17 State Governments have
submitted the Non-Recurring Grant proposals in
respect of 59 ETCs, seeking funding support for
development of physical and training infrastructure
(buildings, teaching aids and office furniture/
equipments) and procurement of training-aids. The
proposals submitted by ETCs were scrutinised by
NIRD&PR with reference to Central Scheme
guidelines and were recommended to MoRD for
consideration.
The details of non-recurring grants approved/
sanctioned by the Screening Committee of Ministry
of Rural Development, based on scrutiny and
recommendations by NIRD&PR during 2016-17 to
SIRD&PRs and ETCs are given in Table-1.

37

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Table -1: Statement showing non-recurring grants Approved/ Sanctioned
during 2016-17 State-wise and SIRD&PR/ETC-wise
S.No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

State
Arunachal Pradesh
Andhra Pradesh
Assam
Chhattisgarh
Himachal Pradesh
Haryana
J&K
Jharkhand
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Telangana
Tamil Nadu
Tripura
Uttarakhand
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal
Total

SIRD&PR
125.00
0.00
0.00
654.50
39.56
56.86
53.70
700.00
0.00
0.00
232.00
0.00
170.00
71.00
50.18
31.25
16.59
128.45
510.18
73.18
2912.45

Training Programmes of SIRD&PRs
The network of NIRD&PR-SIRD&PRs-ETCs increased
the spectrum of training activities both in terms of
increased number of programmes organised and
coverage of clientele groups, especially by way of
organising specific training programmes, workshops
and seminars. The targeted number of training
programmes conducted by SIRD&PRs and ETCs
included different modes viz., Face to Face, Offcampus, Out-reach Programmes, apart from Distance
Mode of Training. A few SIRD&PRs viz. Andhra

38

ETC
0.00
286.39
391.00
0.00
401.51
0.00
22.78
0.00
503.52
1344.64
690.00
59.16
423.90
0.00
117.15
362.96
0.00
147.75
3260.82
527.77
8539.35

( ` In lakh)
Total
125.00
286.39
391.00
654.50
441.07
56.86
76.48
700.00
503.52
1344.64
922.00
59.16
593.90
71.00
167.33
394.21
16.59
276.20
3771.00
600.95
11451.80

Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat, Odisha, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, West Bengal, etc.
have adopted the Distance Mode of Training by
availing of SATCOM facilities. The training
performance of SIRD&PRs during 2016-17 is given in
Table-2.
The liberal funding support extended by MoRD under
the central scheme enabled these Institutions to
organise larger number of training programmes. With
the launching of Flagship Programmes by MoRD viz.,
MGNREGA, NRLM, PMGSY, Rural Housing, Drinking
Water and Sanitation, Watershed Development, etc.,

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Table-2: Training performance of SIRD&PRs: 2016-17
S.No.

State

SIRD&PR

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

Andhra Pradesh*
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam*
Bihar
Chhattisgarh*
Goa
Gujarat*
Haryana*
Himachal Pradesh
J&K (Only Jammu)
Jharkhand
Karnataka*
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra*
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha*
Punjab*
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu*
Telangana*
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal*
Total

APSIRD
SIRD, Itanagar
SIRD&PR, Guwahati
BIPA&RD, Patna
TPIP&RD, Raipur
GIRDA, Panaji
SIRD, Ahmedabad
HIRD, Nilokheri
HIPA, Shimla
IMPA &RD Srinagar
SIRD, Ranchi
ANS-SIRD, Mysore
SIRD, Kottarakara
MG-SIRD,Jabalpur
YASHADA, Pune
SIRD&PR, Imphal
SIRD, Nongsder
SIRD, Aizwal
SIRD, Kohima
SIRD&PR, Bhubanewar
PJN-SIRD, Nabha
IGPR&GVS, Jaipur
SIRD, Karfectar
SIRD&PR, Marimalainagar
TSIPARD, Hyd
SIPA&RD, Adartala
DDU-SIRD, Bakshi-ka-talab
UIRD&PR, Rudrapur
BRAIP&RD Kalyani

No. of
Programmes

No. of
Participants

2256
131
4927
57
1587
211
500
1411
95
26
245
101
414
505
874
85
54
129
71
2497
2762
2025
313
1159
2575
97
164
118
5738
31127

111311
10007
420096
2162
64451
7471
179682
52878
6106
786
3363
313151
24003
18061
25437
3220
1807
5689
8388
135993
110518
38225
25671
57744
129209
3066
6192
3893
514934
2283514

* These include training programmes organised for capacity building of PRI functionaries through ETCs, outreach and
SATCOM mode.

39

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

and other centrally sponsored development schemes
by the GoI, the SIRDs were called upon to focus their
training on these initiatives, among other Statespecific programmes.

on the MoRD website and to initiate action to develop
‘E-learning’ materials with the guidance of NIRD&PR
and other SIRD&PRs.

The SIRD&PRs are expected to upload their Annual
Training Calendar (ATC) on the MoRD web portal of
www.ruraldiksha.nic.in. They are expected to take
steps for sharing training material with other
SIRD&PRs and ETCs by uploading the available material

monthly training performance to MoRD, in the

40

The SIRD&PRs and ETCs are expected to report their
prescribed format, through web-based onlinereporting system by registering on MoRD website at
www.ruraldiksha.nic.in.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER – 7

RURAL TECHNOL
OGY
TECHNOLOGY
DEVEL
OPMENT AND
DEVELOPMENT
DISSEMIN
ATION
DISSEMINA
The National Institute of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR) has initiated an innovative
concept called Rural Technology Park (RTP) in1999 in
which the identified innovations/technologies
relevant to rural development are demonstrated with
the help of successful entrepreneurs. They are called
Technology Partners of RTP located within NIRD&PR
premises. Established in an area of about 65 acres of
land, it is envisaged as an instrument for development
and transfer of technologies to villages. RTP has a
vision to serve as a catalyst to accelerate wide
dissemination of appropriate and affordable
technologies to rural poor for increasing productivity
and enhancing quality of life, thereby enabling
community to move towards sustainable
development. The initiative of Rural Technology Park
is a small step in this direction of identifying a few
appropriate and sustainable rural technologies that
could be demonstrated as a single window display of

training cum production by the technology partners
themselves so as to motivate those who are
interested in adopting these technologies as part of
their livelihoods. The NIRD&PR by playing the role of
an accelerator, can really enhance interface, and
enable tie-up with appropriate institutions that can
cater to the entrepreneurial aspirations of the youth
who have been mulling over innovative ideas and
hopes of technology startups. RTP does the necessary
enablement to serve as a training-cum-production
facility fo the respective technologies. NIRD&PR
provides the hand-holding support along with
necessary physical infrastructure to private partners
who operate and run the units. Currently there are
more than 60 technologies that are being displayed
and used for training-cum-production facility. A large
number of rural people are trained with successful
outcomes.

41

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

The National Rural Building Centre at RTP showcases
model rural houses constructed with different
technologies. The Sanitation Park houses key
sanitation models. RTP organises a number of
exposure cum training programmes, workshops, for
rural youth and women on various rural technologies.
On the occasion of NIRD&PR Foundaytion Day
celebrations in the month of November, Rural
Technology & Crafts Mela is organised. About 200 rural
innovators, rural artisans, women / small scale

entrepreneurs, Government Institutions, etc.,
participated from various parts of the country.
To support "Make in India" campaign and encourage
grassroots innovators / start-ups, an Incubation and
Start up Support Centre was established during 2016
at NIRD&PR. As part of it, Rural Innovators Start up
Conclave (RISC) will be organised every year.
The framework of activities, stakeholders and
services as part of technology development and
dissemination at RTP is given below:

 !"	#$%"&'

		(	



	




(	

(	
	
	

	
+

	

	 	

	
 ,	

-
	

./
	
	
.	$






	








	(	


	
		

-

	
!	
	*),
	
4
	(

"	


!



	

&!

(	1

(	


-
"

&
	

-
 
	
.	
 






"	

"!	

).

*	

" 
&	


&0'
"&	
-*	
(	1


	
0(		
 
"	
*-

(		
	
 

(		
		
	

	
"'	

"	
*(		


"

	

!
		
)

	

,

	
!	
	
,
'	
!	
	

	
	

			

	

	*	

!
0
.	

$
	
"'	1 
'
)&


1
	
 

	
.'	
)	
"'	
2.*3

&*
)
$


 

	)

(


*+,"-*$.
%+/%!*

!"!+$%.%* !..-%&%%1+*
%+/%!*
	




	


	
	





	
	
 	


!	


	
	

	

	
		


	




	


1+2
/+*2*

+!.%+*""&*


	



	



	


	
	


	
	


$

	


	
 "'	

	
	


	
	


&

!	



	
	

$
	
"'	

		

"'	

	
	

(
#		

	
	



	

		

"'	


	
	

(
#		

	


#	



	


42

 0#-"*
"&+*




	

	

	
	



	
)!



ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Various activities organised and initiatives and
achievements of RTP during 2016-17 are given below:

through its website and writing to all the State
Secretaries of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj
to make use of these designs and technologies for
construction of Panchayat Ghar and Anganwadi
Centres under MGNREGS.

1.

1.2 Sustainable Rural Housing Technologies

Activities and Achievements of
RTP

Workshops

1.1 Designshop
RTP organised a four-day Workshop cum Designshop
sponsored by MoPR, GoI. on Development of Designs
for Community Buildings specially Panchayat Bhavan
and Anganwadi Centres using Alternative
Technologies during 2-5 April 2016. The main
objective of the workshop was to guide the States to
develop State-specific designs of different
community buildings at Gram Panchayat level
especially Panchayat Bhavan to be constructed under
MGNREGS. It was inaugurated by Shri S M Vijayanand,
Secretary, Rural Development & Panchayati Raj, Govt
of India, New Delhi. Experts from 13 reputed
institutions involved in sustainable housing
technologies viz., Prof K S Jagadeesh, IISC, ‘Padmasri’
G Shankar, Habitat Technology Group, Shri Vaibhav
Kale of Wonder Grass, Shri P B Sajan of Costford, Shri
Mahavir Acharya of Hunnarshala, Shri Pradeep
Ramancharla, IIIT, Hyderabad, Shri G M Sharma, UNDP
and Ms Gayatri Ratnam of HUDCO participated in the
programme and guided the States' representatives
to come out with State-specific designs.
Outcomes :
The designshop came out with appropriate designs
for construction of Panchayat Bhavans and Anganwadi
centres for 13 States using different sustainable
housing technologies to be taken up under MGNREGS
programme. MoRD made available all these designs

As a mark of Laurie Baker Centenary Celebrations, a
National Workshop on “Sustainable Rural Housing
Technologies” was organised during 23-24 September,
2016 at NIRD&PR. The main objectives of the
workshop were to remember the contributions of
Laurie Baker and to share and develop suitable
strategies in the context of Prime Minister Awas
Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G) and MGNREGS.
Inaugural address was delivered by Shri S. M.
Vijayanand, Chief Secretary, Government of Kerala.
A Key-note address on Relevance of Laurie Baker in
the context of contemporary human settlements
challenges and technological development in India
was given by Shri Kirtee Shah, KSA: Design Planning
Services P.Ltd. (KSADPS). Presentations were made
by experts on Appropriate and Cost-Effective Housing.
The Workshop was attended by of officials of
MGNREGS/PMAY-G of MoRD, of Rural Development
& Panchayati Raj departments of State Governments,
State Housing Boards and Housing Corporations, CEOs
of Zilla Parishads, representatives of HUDCO, NHB,
BMTPC, CBRI, reputed NGOs and other Technology
Institutions dealing with housing.

2.

Rural Technology Mela

The 14th Rural Technology and Crafts Mela was held
during November 24 to 28, 2016 with ‘Swachhtaa’ as
part of Foundation Day celebrations. The event was

43

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Chanddappa, Hon'ble Union Minister of State for
Drinking Water and Sanitation.
Mrs. Sania Mirza, International Tennis Player visited
the mela and encouraged women entrepreneurs and
expressed her happiness in launching RTP Successful
Entrepreneur Home Based Products and Fisheries
Hatchery Technology developed by Teewave
Technologies, RTP Partner.
The event was sponsored by NFDB, MGNREGA
division of MoRD, State Bank of Hyderabad, Apollo
inaugurated on November 24, 2016 in the august
presence of the former Director Generals viz.,
Shri T. L. Sankar, Shri R. C. Choudhury, Shri J. M.
Lyngdoh, Dr. B. K. Sinha, Shri Mathew C Kunnumkal
besides Brig. G B Reddy. The Institutions like MANAGE,
ICRISAT, CSV Wardha, National Innovation Foundation
(NIF), Lords College of Engineering, Amma
Foundation, Bankura Sanitation, etc., participated and
exhibited their technologies and products. Many
Innovators, Artisans, Entrepreneurs, SHGs, NGOs,
Technology Institutions, other organisations, etc.,
from different parts of the country participated in the
Mela and exhibited and demonstrated their products/
technologies. These include jute, handmade paper,
kundan rangoli designs, terracotta, imitation & tribal
jewellery, madhubani paintings, solar products,
organic products, khadi and handloom, crafts, ecofriendly sanitation products, pottery, wooden crafts,
glass crafts, Kashmiri products, Science products, costeffective electronic products, etc., Besides, the
products in large quantity were made available for
sale in the 300 stalls installed for the purpose.
As part of Mela, Swachhata Posters under SWACHH
BHARAT ABHIYAN were released by Shri Ramesh

44

Hospitals, NABARD, Canara Bank, JK SRLM, Central
Bank of India, State Bank of India, Syndicate Bank,
and Andhra Bank.

3.

Rural Innovators Start-up Conclave

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

A two-day national level Rural Innovators Startup
Conclave was organised at NIRD&PR on March 23 –
24, 2017. The event was inaugurated by Shri Y. S.
Chowdary, Honourable Union Minister of State for
Science and Technology and Earth Sciences on 23
March, 2017. On this occasion, MoU was signed in the
presence of Honourable Minister, between NIRD&PR
and AUTODESK for establishment of Design Centre at
RTP which will facilitate innovators to get trained and
develop a virtual design for their innovations/
technology prototypes and products. Shri N Ramesh
Kumar, IAS,(Retd.) State Election Commissioner,
Andhra Pradesh delivered the valedictory address.
The event had two sets of participants: A) Rural
Innovators / Technologists and Start-ups B) Enablers,
Technical Institutions, Funding Agencies and
Corporate organisations, etc.
Nominations were received from more than 200
innovators and Startups. Shortlisting was done by
expert committee members based on technology
rural viability, scaling, certifications, patents, etc. Jury
members finally identified twelve innovators and
startups from six domain sectors, which consists of
(a) Agriculture and allied sector (b) Green Energy
Technologies (Solar, wind, biogas, hybrid, etc.) (c)
Drinking Water, Health and Sanitation, d) Waste to
Wealth (Liquid, Solid and Recycling) e) Sustainable
Housing f) Sustainable Livelihood Opportunities. The
Best Startups were awarded a cash prize of ` 1,00,000
and Best Innovations of ` 50,000.

4.

Training and Exposure programmes

4.1 Skill and Entrepreneurship Development
Twenty eight training programmes were conducted
for the rural and tribal youth during 2016-17. Nearly

450 persons coming from rural and remote villages
from various parts of the country undertook training
on various technologies and skills stationed at RTP
from the technology partners.
A sponsored training-cum-construction programme
was organised from August 29 to September 7, 2016
at RTP for the engineers of Government of Rajasthan.
on construction of prototype houses under Pradhan
Mantri Awas Yojana - Gramin (PMAYG). 23 participants
from Department of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj of the State participated in the
programme. During the training period, the
participants constructed a cost-effective design
model building using Lauri Bakers technologies. A
complete holistic approach was adopted in the
construction right from the selection of the site, to
foundation techniques, wall construction, roofing,
plastering and flooring. Technology-wise participants
are given in the Figure given below.

4.2 Exposure Programmes
RTP organised 10 exposure cum training programmes
for rural youth, SHG members and tribal community
people drawan from Andhra Pradesh, Odisha,
Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and interested in some of the
skills available at RTP.

45

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Technology-wise Participants

V illagers from Rajahmundry Parliamentary
Constituency, Andhra Pradesh were given orientation
on RTP livelihood technologies and training
programmes were organised on the technologies on
the choice of the village community. Shri Murali
Mohan Maganti, Honourble Member of Lok Sabha,
Rajahmundry Constituency participated in the
valedictory programme and interacted with the
trainees and assured them of his support for the
development of necessary infrastructure and in the
establishment of the units for their economical
development. He requested NIRD&PR for more of
such programmes for the villagers of his constituency.
He expressed his satisfaction and informed that he
will share with his fellow Parliament members about
the activities of RTP for them also to take advantage
of the facility for creating livelihood technologies in
their constituencies.

46

Special efforts were made for the capacity building/
skill development of the tribal community of Paderu,
Chintoor and Rampachodavaram, Andhra Pradesh,
who were mobilised and identified for exposure visit
to RTP. Taking their interest into consideration,
training programmes were organised on mud block
making for construction of Cost-Effective Rural
Housing and Sanitation.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

The list of Training and Exposure are given Annexures
XI & XII.

5

Demonstration and Display of Rural
Technologies

NIRD&PR participated as Co-organiser in Pride of India
Expo 2017 as part of Indian Science Congress 2017 held
at Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh during 3-7 January, 2017.
The RTP exhibited eight technologies viz: (1) Rural
Building Centre-cost-effective housing models (2)
Teewave Solar technologies (3) Sri Sarawathi Mahila
Gruh Udyog- a unit of soya food products.(4) Biopesticides unit-Neem based products (5) Gandhi
handmade paper – Handmade paper conversion
products (6) Herbal honey unit- bee keeping and
honey processing products (7) Medi Herbz- Herbal
products (8) Mushroom processed products. Live
demonstration of Stabilised Mud Block making was
showcased so as to orient the visitors about the
appropriate rural housing and create interest to adopt
the eco-friendly material for construction of green
house. Besides, GIS Applications and NIRD&PR
Literatures were displayed for public awareness.
The event was witnessed and appreciated by Shri

Y. S. Chowdary, and the Hon'ble Minister of State
for Science and Technology & Earth Sciences, Prof.
Muhammad Yunus, Nobel Peace Prize awardee and
Founder of Grameen Bank, Bangladesh and State
Ministers.
With a view to disseminating and demonstrating and
spreading awareness on the technologies, RTP also
participated in exhibitions organised by Indian
Institute of Millets Research, National Institute of Rice
Research, Prof. Jayasankar Telangana State
Agricultural University, SRAS MELA, ICRISAT, etc.

6.

Visitors to RTP

Shri Arjun Munda, Hon’ble former Chief Minister of
Jharkhand State and former Member of Parliament
visited NIRD&PR, Rural Technology Park (RTP) on
22.6.2016 along with his associates. He visited all the
Technology units, Rural Building Centre and Sanitation
Park in RTP. He keenly interacted with the technology
partners of solar technologies viz., Thrive Solar
Energy, Visionary Lighting and Energy India (VLE),
Teewave Technologies and appreciated the products
as user-friendly and cost-effective. He expressed the
view that the efforts being made by RTP in this regard

Prof. Muhammad Yunus at RTP Stall during Indian
Science Congress 2017

47

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

are noteworthy. He said that the effort of RTP in
respect of these renewable energies will be taken to
the notice of Shri Piyush Goel, Union Minister of
Power and Energy. He also visited the Vermi-Compost
unit, Natural Dye and Handmade Paper unit, Honey
Processing, Leaf Plate Making and Herbal units.
Shri Chennamaneni Vidyasagar Rao, Hon'ble Governor
of Maharashtra, visited RTP, on 22.6.2016. He visited
all the Technology units, Rural Building Centre and
Sanitation Park, besides practically looking into the
compressed mud blocks making and enquired the
details of the said technologies. He desired that these
technologies need to be popularised in a big way
keeping in view its eco and environment-friendly
nature.
Besides VIPs, more than 10000 persons from different
villages, colleges, schools, institutions and other
organisations visited RTP during the year.

7.

Internship/Block Placements

During the year, final year students from various
colleges were associated with RTP for Block
Placement and Internship for a period of 45 days as
given below:
z

48

BA students from Department of Economics,
Christ University, Bengaluru.

z

MSW students from Sree Vigram, PG College,
Shamshabad

z

Civil Engineering Department, Lords Institute
of Engineering & Technology, Hyderabad

z

PGDM-DS students from Entrepreneur
Development Institute of India (EDTI),
Ahmedabad

z

MSW students from Department of Population
Studies and Social Work, Sri Venkateswara
University, Tirupati

8.

Study/Industrial Tours to RTP

Students from various schools visited RTP to acquaint
themselves with the live demonstration of
technologies and having practical experience of
understanding of solar energy applications, biomass,
organic farming, rural housing, natural dying,
handmade paper products processing, etc.
Study tours of the university/college students from
across the country were encouraged to enlighten
them about the NIRD&PR PG Diploma Courses and
RTP activities, namely, entrepreneurship
development, skill training programmes and Interns
opportunities, etc.
All the International participants of NIRD&PR training
programmes were given exposure at RTP on the
technologies, activities and special initiatives for rural
people. Discussions were held with them on the
technologies of their interest and suitable for transfer
depending upon the need of the country and given
the necessary guidance.
The participants of training programmes from
Research & Development, Technical, Agricultural,
Management, Social Welfare, Entrepreneurship,

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Visitors to RTP : 2016-17

Participants

Education Institutions, IITs and ICAR Institutions, etc.,
were given exposure to the RTP technologies and its
scope for entrepreneurship development,
technology transfer and sustainable livelihoods. The
data of month-wise visitors is depicted in the given
bar-diagram.

mandal of visakhapatnam District, Andhra Pradesh

9.

Transfer of Appropriate Housing
and other Technologies:

Works’. Under the Mudra scheme, the women have

Based on the training and exposure visit to RTP,
number of participants/visitors undertake starting
entrepreneurial activities in the trade of their choice
and became entrepreneurs creating jobs for others.
Some of the successful cases are given below:

purchasing of machinery. They manufactured 300

and motivated them to take up the training on
compressed mud blocks at RTP, NIRD&PR. After
returning from the training these women
established a unit in the name of ‘NAVA Bricks
taken a loan of ` 1.5 lakh from the SBI for the
bricks per day with a manpower of eight members
who are paid ` 200 per day. An amount of ` 1.5 lakh
was cleared by the six women and out of them two
started their own brick making. These two women

i.

Successful Entrepreneur in MUD BLOCK
MAKING from Koduru Village

A retired engineer from BHPV Ltd. identified six
women from Koduru village located in Ankapalli

also took loan under Mudra scheme from SBI bank.
These women supplied bricks for construction of
hospital in the village.

49

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ii.

Self-employment Generation through
Herbal Phenoyl

supplying to the government schools and hospitals
in the district.

Dalmiya cement, as part of CSR activities mobilised
four SHG women from Nawabpet village, Maylavaram
mandal, YSR (Kadapa) district to undergo a training
programme at RTP, NIRD&PR .
They started home based products - phenoyl, herbal
shampoo and surf making unit. Initial investment was
provided by the Dalmiya cements under the CSR
activity, and initially they have funded ` 1,50,000 for
procuring the raw materials and earned more than
` 40000 to 50000 per month.

10. Solar barefoot Engineers for Solar

At present these women empowered themselves by
establishing their own enterprise and started
manufacturing the home made products and solar
lights, marketed them not only in their mandal but
also in other mandals of the district. They were

The Surya Mitra Skill Development Programme was
sponsored by Ministry of New & Renewable Energy,
Government of India. The programme aims at

50

Applications - Surya Mitra Programme
Implementation

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

developing the skills of youth, considering the
opportunities for employment in the growing Solar
Energy Power project’s installation, operation and
maintenance in India and abroad. The Programme is
also designed to prepare the candidates to become
new entrepreneurs in Solar Energy sector. Each
training programme consists of 30 participants and
the total duration is three months. The residential
and training facilities including boarding and lodging
were arranged by NIRD&PR.
Green Urja Unique Technologies & Systems Pvt. Ltd.

(GUUTS) in collaboration with RTP, NIRD&PR
successfully trained more than 100 barefoot
engineers and placed 70 per cent of the candidates in
solar companies.
The trainees have been attached for internship in
solar companies like Thrive Solar Energy Pvt.Ltd.,
Visionary Lighting and Energy India in order to gain
practical experience in solar technologies like P.V
Home Lighting Systems, Solar Lanterns, stand alone
street lights, study lights for children, D.C Systems,
assembling and repairs of the solar equipment, etc.

PHOTOGRAPHS OF SPECIAL EVENTS AT RTP

Mrs.Sania Mirza, International Tennis Player Visiting the RTP Mela

Successful Completion of Surya Mitra Batch -1 Programme at
RTP, NIRD&PR

Union Minister of State for Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ramesh
Chandappa Jigajinagi Releasing Swachhata Posters at RTP Mela

Successful Completion of Surya Mitra Batch -2 Programme
at RTP, NIRD&PR

51

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Practical Training to Surya Mitra Candidates

Successful Completion of Surya Mitra Batch -3 Programme at
RTP, NIRD&PR

Technology Demonstration by Rural Innovator at 14thRTCM

International Delegates' Visit to VLE Solar at RTP

International Participants’ Visit to RTP

Exposure Visit to RTP

52

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Internship at RTP by Civil Engineering Students

Technology Promotion to International Participants Visiting
RTP

MANAGE & RTP-NIRD&PR Collaborative Training

Study Visit to RTP

Indian Science Congress – Pride of India

Valedictory by Shri N. Ramesh Kumar, IAS, (Retd.) State
Election Commissioner, Andhra Pradesh

53

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER - 8

SPECIAL PROJECTS
AND RESOUR
CE CELL
S
RESOURCE
CELLS

Special Projects and Resource Cells have been
established at NIRD&PR with a view to facilitating the
special initiatives of Ministry of Rural Development.
These include Project Cell on Rural Self-Employment
Training Institutes (RSETIs), Resource Cells on
National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM) and Deen
Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDUGKY). Besides, S.R. Sankaran Chair was also
established in 2012 by the Institute to promote
research and policy dialogues for improving
conditions of rural labour. The details of these projects
and cells are given below.

1. RSETI Project Cell
NIRD&PR is the Nodal Agency for implementation of
RSETI Project of Ministry of Rural Development
(MoRD), which aims at mitigating the unemployment
problem prevailing amongst rural youth in general
and BPL in particular. Under the project it is proposed

54

to have a dedicated infrastructure in each district
called RSETIs for skill development / skill upgradation
of the youth. NIRD&PR is given the responsibility of
receiving and processing the infrastructure grant
proposals from various sponsoring banks, taking
approval of MoRD, conveying the sanctions and to
release the funds for building infrastructure. NIRD&PR
also takes up the issues related to allotment of the
land/possession of the land with various district level
as well as State level authorities and tries to resolve
them. It also assists/guides banks in construction of
RSETIs buildings. Apart from this, NIRD&PR is also
involved in capacity building of various stakeholders
by conducting workshops for Nodal Officers of the
Banks and Liaison Officers of the State. NIRD&PR has
designed standard curriculum module for training.
NIRD&PR also brings out various publications such as
Enterprise – RSETIs Quarterly News Letter, Success
Stories, etc., from time to time, to build up the
networking of the RSETIs.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Financial and Physical Progress as on
31.3.2017:
As on 31.3.2017 there are 586 functional RSETIs in the
country sponsored by various banks. NIRD&PR has
released an amount of ` 319.90 crore to 467 RSETIs as
on 31.3.2017 which covers 29 States and 5 Union
Territories. Construction of RSETI buildings have been
completed in 170 districts and nearing completion at
another 96 locations. Construction is in progress in
the remaining districts/ locations. During the year
2016-17, a sum of ` 58.05 crore has been released to
48 RSETIs. The Physical and Financial Progress of RSETIs
is given below :
Cumulative
Cumulative
Year
Physical Progress Financial Progress
(as on)
(No. of RSETIs)
(Rs. Crore)
31.03.2010
103
29.46
31.03.2011
205
85.26
31.03.2012
295
140.11
31.03.2013
349
173.41
31.03.2014
375
201.15
31.03.2015
395
224.65
31.03.2016
444
261.85
31.03.2017
467
319.90
Bank-wise & State-wise breakup of the disbursement
of the funds are given in Annexure-XIII.

copies of this newsletter are printed and distributed
to all the RSETIs, Banks, RBI, NABARD, State
government district collectors, PD DRDAs, LDMs,
DDMs and the people interested in RSETI activities.

Glimpses of RSETIs' Infrastructure:

Enterprise – NIRD&PR-RSETIs Quarterly
Newsletter of RSETIs:
NIRD&PR also publishes a Quarterly Newsletter of
RSETIs titled “Enterprise”, covering news and events
from various RSETIs across the country, such as
conduct of training programmes, visit of guests,
creation of infrastructure and success stories. This
Quarterly Newsletter is very popular and in demand
among the various stakeholders of RSETIs. 3000

Dena RSETI, Himmath Nagar, Gujarat

55

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CBI RSETI, Surguja, Chhattisgarh

2. NRLM Resource Cell
Aajeevika - National Rural Livelihoods Mission
(NRLM) was launched by the Ministry of Rural
Development (MoRD), Government of India in June
2011. The Mission aims at creating efficient and
effective institutional platforms of the rural poor
enabling them to increase household income through
sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved
access to financial services.
Genesis
The Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), a
flagship programme of the Ministry of Rural
Development, implemented for well over a decade
since 1999 has been restructured and is being
implemented as National Rural Livelihoods Mission
since FY 2010-11. The SGSY was aimed at providing
sustainable income to rural BPL households through
income generating assets / economic activities so as
to bring them out of poverty.
However, evaluation of the SGSY by National Institute
of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR),
Bankers Institute of Rural Development (BIRD) and
several others showed mixed results. Out of the

56

SBI RSETI Kishanganj, Bihar

estimated 25 million households organised into SHGs
up to 2010, only 22 per cent were able to access bank
credit. The studies also brought out significant
variations in the extent of mobilisation of the poor
SHGs and the quality of their functioning. The oneoff assetisation programme focusing on single
livelihood activity has not met multiple livelihood
requirements of the poor. Often, the capital
investment was provided up-front as a subsidy
without adequate investment in social mobilisation
and group formation.
Besides, uneven geographical spread of SHGs, high
attrition rates among members of SHGs and lack of
adequate banking sector response, had impeded the
programme performance. Further, several States
were not able to fully invest the funds received under
SGSY, indicating a lack of appropriate delivery systems
and dedicated efforts for skill training and building
resource absorption capacity among the rural poor.
There was a considerable mismatch between the
capacity of implementing structures and the
requirements of the programme. Absence of
collective institutions in the form of SHG federations
precluded the poor from accessing higher order
support services for productivity enhancement,
marketing linkages and risk management.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

It is in this context that the Ministry of Rural
Development (MoRD), Government of India (GoI)
constituted a Committee on Credit Related Issues
under SGSY (under the Chairmanship of Prof.
Radhakrishna) to look into various aspects of the
scheme implementation. The Committee
recommended adoption of a ‘livelihoods approach’
to eliminate rural poverty, encompassing the four
inter-related tasks of:
z

Mobilising all the poor households into
functionally effective SHGs and their
federations;

z

Enhancing their access to bank credit and other
financial, technical and marketing services;

z

Building their capacities and skills for gainful
and sustainable livelihoods development; and

z

Converging various schemes for efficient
delivery of social and economic support
services to poor with optimal results.

The government accepted the recommendation of
the Committee and restructured SGSY into National
Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) to provide greater
focus and momentum for poverty reduction and to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDG)
by 2015. The Mission was formally launched on June
3, 2011. NRLM was renamed as Deen Dayal Antyodaya
Yojana-NRLM (DAY-NRLM ).
NRLM Mission
"To reduce poverty by enabling the poor households
to access gainful self-employment and skilled wage
employment opportunities, resulting in appreciable
improvement in their livelihoods on a sustainable
basis, through building strong grassroots institutions
of the poor".

NRLM Frame work

57

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

In addition, the poor would be facilitated to achieve
increased access to their rights, entitlements and
public services, diversified risk and better social
indicators of empowerment. NRLM believes in
harnessing the innate capabilities of the poor and
complements them with capacities (information,
knowledge, skills, tools, finance and collectivisation)
to participate in the growing economy of the country.

Support Structures at different levels in NRLM


At National level - National Mission
Management Unit (NMMU) – to provide
technical support to State missions



At State level - State Mission Management Unit
(SMMU) - State-wide sensitive support
structure, full time dedicated head of the
mission



Positioning multi-disciplinary team of trained
and competent professionals at State, district
and sub-district level



Quality human resources from open market
and from Government

Key Components of DAY-NRLM
Universal Social Mobilisation, Institutional platforms
for Poor, Community Funds as Resources in
Perpetuity, Financial Inclusion, Livelihoods, Gender,
FNHW and Convergence and partnerships

58

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

from NRLM Resource Cell to all the SRLMs and
MoRD as per requirement.

Key Achievements of Resource Cell :
2016-17
(a)

Scope & Coverage : NRLM has set out with an agenda
to cover 7 crore rural poor households, across 600
districts, 6000 blocks, 2.5 lakh Gram Panchayats and 6
lakh villages in the country through self-managed
Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and federated institutions
and support them for livelihoods collectives in a
period of 8-10 years.
As on 31 March 2017 NRLM has entered into 30 States
/ UTs in 4235 Blocks and 445 lakhs of women were
mobilised into 38 lakh SHGs.

NIRD&PR-NRLM Resource Cell
Objectives
1.

2.

To strengthen implementation of NRLM
through capacity building of SRLMs and by
arranging implementation support from NRLM
Resource Cell
To facilitate continuous flow of trained
National, State, District, Field professionals

Development of National Resource Persons
and State Resource Persons:

NIRD&PR has been maintaining the database of
experienced Resource Persons in the fields of SHG
and related activities and Rural Development
programmes to support various capacity building
activities of NRLM. A pool of 326 Resource Persons at
the National level including North Eastern States has
been identified by NIRD&PR, NMMU and MoRD
jointly. As on 31 March, 2017, IB CB – 51, LH – 67,
Leadership – 05, HR – 02, Gender – 22, FNHW – 14, FI –
38, Convergence – 05, PTM – 13 and other themes –
66, Total – 281.
As per the PMO agenda, NMMU,MoRD and NIRD&PR,
NRLM Resource Cell designed a 11-days schedule for
SRPs training and conducted 4 batches (including one
at Guwahati) of training at NIRD&PR, Hyderabad. The
training was organised simultaneously in different
thematic areas like SM, SI-IB, FI-FM, Books, Audit,
Gender-FNHW,V ision, Building, leadership &
Management and Participatory process (PIP, MCP, VRP
& Convergence and Livelihoods) during 10 may to 30
June’2016. The total number of participants trained
in 4 programmes was 677 from 21 States and 2 UTs
(Puducherry and Andaman & Nicobar).
(b)

Support to SRLMs on Block Level Resource
Persons (BRPs) Training:

NIRD&PR,NRLM(RC) supported 10 States to roll out
BRP trainings by deputing National Level Resource

59

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Persons (NRPs) and NRLM (RC) staff. Supported States
i.e., Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Punjab, Haryana,
Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat.
(c)

Study on factors leading to the success of SHG
Bank linkage

Conducted a study on “Factors leading to the success
of SHG Bank linkage" in four south Indian States viz.,
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and
Karnataka. A four-member committee has been
constituted for the study. The committee has
submitted report to NIRD&PR and the same has been
forwarded to MoRD.
(d)

Documentation of Business Models

NRLM Resource cell in coordination with NMMU
documented Best Business Models under NRLM in
nine States viz., Dairy based livelihoods, Agri/
Horticulture based livelihoods, Human nutrition
based livelihoods and Micro Enterprise based
livelihoods with the support of NRPs and the report
has been submitted to MoRD. NRPs made
presentation on their respective themes before
Secretary, MoRD and Joint Secretary (RL) at Delhi on
02.09.2016. Report has been published by MoRD.

60

(e)

Review on status of Convergence Special
Projects

Completed Convergence Special Project Reviews in
seven States taking help of NRPs i.e., Maharashtra,
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand
and West Bengal. Reports have been submitted to
NMMU, MoRD.
(f)

Support to Andaman & Nicobar administration
to roll out NRLM programme:

As requested by A&N administration, NIRD&PR NRLM
(RC) has conducted two days orientation on NRLM
concepts to rural development department officials,
selected block development officers, Panchayat
Extension officers and identified Community
Resource Persons. Also deputed two Community
Master Trainers from Telangana State for 10 days to
train the existing cadres and leaders. Further,
arranged an immersion programme for 31 member
team of officials and community from 27 Feb to 6
March 2017. The participants were taken for exposure
visit to Warangal rural district for 4 days for interaction
with SHG,VO,CLF,Bank officials and DRDO officials.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

(g)

Financial Literacy programmes :

Resource Cell coordinated Financial Literacy training
programmes with BIRD, Lucknow and conducted 9
training programmes for 9 States and 221 participants
attended at BIRD Lucknow (Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Odisha, Gujarat, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Rajasthan and Maharashtra). In the year
2017-18, NRLM (RC) will conduct need based financial
literacy training programmes at NIRD&PR Hyderabad.

per the demand and trained 610 participants.A
total of 25 programmes for the SRLMs were
planned during FY 2016-17. As of 23 February,
2017, a total of 24 programmes have been
completed and another 3 additional
programmes will be completed by 31 March,
2017.


Bankers' Orientation on NRLM: Bankers from
the States of Nagaland, Mizoram, Meghalaya
and Manipur attended the three days
orientation cum field exposure on NRLM in four
different programmes. A total of 60 Bankers
from Banks including Rural banks of Nagaland,
Mizoram, Meghalaya and Manipur,
Nationalised banks like SBI, UBI, Apex Bank,
etc., participated in the programme.



Community Cadres' Training : Community
cadres and volunteers from intensive and non
intensive blocks of Meghalaya were provided
training on Social Mobilisation, IB-CB, FI and
convergence. One batch of Bank Sakhis from
Mizoram and Meghalaya were exclusively
trained at NIRD&PR. A total of 77 community
cadres were trained during the FY 2016-17 from
two States viz., Meghalaya and Mizoram.



Thematic workshops and training: Four
workshops on Financial Inclusion (FI), MIS,
Livelihood and Convergence were organised in
coordination with NMMU, NRLM where SRLMs
of NE region participated. A total of two
workshops including FI and Livelihoods were
completed during the year. Additional two
workshops on MIS and Convergence were also
organised in coordination with NMMU-NRLM

North East Regional NRLM
Resource Cell at Guwahati
NRLM Resource Cell was established in July 2015 at
NIRD&PR, NERC, Guwahati to cater to the needs of
the NE States.
Objectives:
1.

To facilitate continuous support of trained
National, State, District, Field professionals
from NRLM Resource Cell to all the SRLMs and
MoRD as per requirement.

2.

To plan and design demand based activities for
the SRLMs of North East Region.

3.

To document best practices of NER and
development of training modules and
materials

Activities of NERC –NRLM Resource Cell : 2016-17


Developed 80 members of SRLM staff as Core
Trainers



Need based training to SRLMs officials,
24 programmes have been organised in
NIRD&PR-NERC campus and various SRLMs as

61

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17



Three Annual Regional Writeshop for the NE
SRLMs: Conducted three Annual National
Writeshops at NIRD&PR NERC, Guwahati for NE
States in February, 2017. Joint Secretary,

NRLM,MoRD, Director, F&A, NRLPs, Leads of
NMMU, NRLM, NMMU, MoRD officials, NRPs,
SMDs/CEOs, COOs, SPMs & other senior SRLM
officials attended the writeshops.

NIRD&PR–NRLM-Resource Cell Training Performance : 2016-17
Table-1: Programmes Organised : 2016-17

62

S. No.

Details

No. of Programs

Participants

1

A. NIRD&PR, Hyderabad
Campus training Programmes

40

2095

2

Off-campus training programmes

68

3978

3

NIRD&PR supported Off-campus workshops

2

90

4

Campus workshops coordinated with NMMU, MoRD

11

603

Sub-Total

121

6766

5

B. NERC Resouce Cell, Guwahati
Campus training programmes

17

674

6

Off-campus training programmes

09

294

7

Campus workshops coordinated with NMMU, MoRD

05

389

Sub-Total

31

1357

Total

151

8076

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

3. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen
Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY)
Resource Cell
India has 378.67 million young people in the age group
of 18 to 35 years and they constitute 31.27 per cent of
the total population. This age group is projected to
increase to 429.21 million by 2022. This is a
demographic challenge, but also a potential
demographic dividend, if the productivity of this large
youth force is harnessed through demand-based skill
and capacity development.



DDU-GKY is placement linked skill development
programme of Ministry of Rural Development,
Government of India (MoRD), initiated in the
year 2004-05 and evolved out of the need to
diversify incomes of the rural poor and to cater
to the occupational aspirations of the youth.



The programme’s focus is on skilling with
minimum duration of 3 months and placement
with above minimum wages in the formal sector
for rural youth.

Key Features

The statistics also reveal that many industrialised
nations are facing an ageing population problem.
These countries are expected to face a cumulative
shortage of 57 million workers by 2020. These
numbers represent a historic opportunity for India to
transform its demographic surplus into a demographic
dividend.Lack of formal education, marketable skills
and other constraints imposed by poverty place
significant entry barriers to job market.



Ensuring all trainees are able to access skilling
and placement services free of cost



Adopting Gram Panchayat (GP) saturation
model for enrolment



Providing financial assistance for transport/
lodging and food during training



Providing post-placement support



Providing placement counseling, facilitation
and tracking for one year

Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana or
DDU-GKY is a Government of India youth employment
scheme, launched on 25 September 2014 on the
occasion of 98th birth anniversary of Pandit
Deendayal Upadhyaya. It is skill training and
placement programme of the Ministry of Rural
Development (MoRD), designed not only to provide
high quality skill training opportunities to the rural
poor, but also to establish a larger ecosystem that
supports trained candidates to secure a better future.
It occupies a unique position amongst other skill
training programmes, due to its focus on the rural
poor youth and its emphasis on sustainable
employment through post-placement tracking,
retention and career progression.



Providing training in trades that do not require
formal education



Encouraging exemplary performance in skill
development by instituting awards



Migration Support and Alumni Network



Emphasis on regions like Jammu & Kashmir
(HIMAYAT), Left Wing Extremist Districts
(ROSHINI) and North Eastern States



Standard Operating Procedures to provide
essential quality assurance framework for
training infrastructure and service delivery



Inclusive Programme Design which involves
mandatory coverage of socially disadvantaged
groups (SC/ST 50%, Minority 15%, Women 33%).

63

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Special Components of DDU-GKY
ROSHINI -Special Initiative for Most Critical Left-Wing
Extremist Affected Areas
A special initiative for critical left-wing extremist
affected areas, Roshini with separate guidelines has
been launched that takes into account the peculiar
situation in extremist affected districts. In particular,
it provides for training programmes over different
time periods for three, six, nine and twelve months.
In the twelve month format besides the normal, skill,
IT and soft skill training, trainees are also provided
National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS)
certification (8th or 10th) depending on the level at
which they dropped out of the formal school system.
1.3.2 HIMAYAT - Special Scheme for Jammu and
Kashmir
The Ministry of Rural Development operates a special
scheme under DDU-GKY for Jammu and Kashmir which
unlike other DDU-GKY flavors covers:
i.
ii.
iii.

Urban as well as rural youth
Below Poverty Line (BPL) as well as Above
Poverty Line (APL) persons
Wage employment in the formal sector as well
as self-employment.

The progress is fully funded scheme implemented in
coordination with the State Government by dedicated
Himayat Mission Management Unit, located in
Srinagar and Jammu regions.
Implementation Model
DDU-GKY follows a three-tier implementation model.
The DDU-GKY National Unit at MoRD is the agency
responsible for national policy-making, funding,
technical support and facilitation.

64

The DDU-GKY State Skill Missions, generally
embedded within the State Rural Livelihood Missions
(SRLMs) and NIRD&PR, are envisioned to play a central
role in providing co-funding and implementation
support to DDU-GKY in the State.
The Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs)
implements the programme through skill training and
placement projects.

NIRD&PR DDUGKY Resource Cell
The Ministry of Rural Development has designated
NIRD&PR for DDU-GKY as a Central Technical Support
Agency (CTSA). for DDU-GKY. In the capacity of CTSA,
the resource cell acts as a knowledge platform for
developing effective monitoring framework and
capacitating all the stakeholders including conducting
Due Diligence, centre inspections, placement
verification, etc.
The resource cell is also engaged in financial
monitoring relating to the activities of the PIAs
including appraisals of new projects under DDU-GKY.
The MIS activities of the Division include
development of ERP system, Esop certification and
maintenance of ddugky.info portal.
12th Plan Targets And Performance
YEAR
2012-2013
2013-2014
2014-2015
2015-2016
2016-2017

TARGET
2,12,000
2,50,000
2,10,000
1,77,986
2,00,014

TRAINED
2,17,997
2,01,019
86,120
2,70,392
1,62,586*

Total

10,50,000

9,38,114

* Out of whom 1,00,127 have been trained by Projects
monitored by NIRD&PR

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Projects Monitored by Resource Cell:
Financial Overview



(` in crore)
Scheme

Total
Project
Cost

SGSY(SP)
DDU-GKY
Himayat
Total

742.00
1304.35
171.60
2217.95

Total
Total
grant
grant
received released
from MoRD/ to PIAs
State
4.18
4.18
31.95
31.95
11.80
6.08
47.93
42.21

The programmes are broadly categorised as follows:
¾

Competency Based Training Programmes for
SRLM/PIA staff/ DDU-GKY candidates

¾

Workshops on SOP for Capacity Building of
SRLM and PIA Staff

Conducted 1466 Desk Verification and 635
Physical Verification. Further, also involved in
conducting 522 inspections.

¾

Workshops on digitising content

¾

PIA Orientation Programmes

¾

Writeshops on SOP

Empanelment of Resource Persons on various
thematic areas which include, Training, Impact
evaluation, Translation, Content development
and Documentation & Animation

¾

Trainings on Project Appraisal

¾

Trainings on PFMS modules, as the Institute is
the Central Agency in Registration of projects
in PFMS for all States

Resource Cell Activities: 2016-17




In the year 2016-17 under DDU-GKY Programme,
the Institute has conducted 366 training
programmes/workshops for various
stakeholders across country, training more than
10,000 people. The programmes were targeted
to nodal agencies of DDU-GKY in the States,
Prospective PIAs, internal staff members, PIA
trainers, PIA Quality team members.



Preparation of Reports viz., “Ageing
Population”, “Africa Knowledge Hub”, “Best
Practices” by PIAs in DDU-GKY ecosystem



Organised Alumni meet for DDU-GKY
candidates to strengthen network building
among placed candidates.



Audit work related to release of instalment /
closure/ foreclosure, etc



Initial screening



Qualitative appraisal



Arbitration process

 NIRD&PR has also taken the initiative to
develop and maintain e-SOP application.
This portal is being used by DDU-GKY staff
from MoRD, CTSAs (NIRD&PR, NABCONS),
SRLMs& PIAs across India. It is mandatory
for all project functionaries under DDU-GKY
to be trained, assessed and certified in the
Standard Operating Procedures. This elearning portal is designed to facilitate selflearning of the SOP as well as certification.
The platform helps in understanding the
SOP with all the relevant stakeholders in
the DDU-GKY ecosystem.

65

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Till date, more than 8000 online certifications have
been completed through this portal.

SOP Administration and Policy
Advocacy
The Institute had made remarkable contribution
towards rural skilling. This has been acknowledged
by the fact that the Ministry has assigned various roles
to NIRD&PR as a center of excellence. Standard
Operating Procedures (SOP) is one among them,
where the Institute has led the process, anchored and
drafted two volumes of SOP for high quality standards
for better implementation of DDU-GKY.
The Institute has developed SOP in coordination with
different thematic experts and laid down the process
for PIA registration and Project Sanction, Project
Implementation Procedures, Training Design and
Planning, Training Centre, Training Initiation &

66

Completion, Tracking & Placement, Project Financial
Procedures, Grading of a Project and Project
Implementing Agency, Default Management
Procedures, etc. These procedures were compiled in
two volumes containing 10 chapters.
NIRD&PR also administers the revision required in
the SOP from time to time and currently engaged in
version 4.0.0. The Institute also administers the SOP
for State specific requirement. Thus, the Institute
brings synergy and new initiatives across skilling ecosystem.
The Institute also extends support to the Ministry/
States, inter-alia for inviting partners into DDU-GKY
skilling eco-system, appraisal protocols to be adopted
for selection of Project Implementation Agencies
(PIAs), fund flow arrangement, closure of projects,
release of funds, policy for arbitration and recovery
from PIAs.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

4. S. R. Sankaran Chair
S.R. Sankaran Chair (Rural Labour) has been instituted
at the National Institute of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj by the Ministry of Rural Development
(MoRD), in honour of legendary civil servant Shri S.R.
Sankaran, who relentlessly strived for the upliftment
of the poor throughout his career and after retirement
till his demise. The objective of the Chair is to promote
research on issues that would enhance understanding
and help in improving the world of work and the life
of rural labour. Collaborative research, seminars,
workshops and policy dialogues involving
institutions, organisations, policy makers and other
stakeholders with similar objectives, and placing the
results in the larger public domain through working
papers, articles in learned journals, books and policy
briefs are part of the activities set out for the Chair. It
started formal functioning since August, 2012. In brief
period of time it has undertaken a number of activities
to achieve the above objectives and disseminated
the philosophy of Shri S. R. Sankaran. Besides

conducting research, the Chair has undertaken the
following activities during 2016-2017:

National Seminar
National Seminar on “Governance, Resources and
Livelihoods of Adivasis in India: Implementation of
PESA and FRA” was held during 18-19 November 2016
at NIRD&PR, Hyderabad. Shri Ch.Vidyasagar Rao, the
Hon’ble Governor of Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu was
the chief guest for the Inaugural Session and
Mr. Tevita G. Boseiwaqa Tagniavulau, Director General
of Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia
and the Pacific (CIRDAP) was the Guest of Honour.
About 40 delegates including distinguished scholars,
prominent young researchers, civil society
organisations and former administrators presented
papers and participated in the deliberations. Prof. K.
B. Saxena gave the keynote address and Prof. Ch.
Hanumatha Rao, Honorary Professor delivered the
valedictory lecture. It was presided over by Prof. Amit
Bhaduri, Professor in Pavia University, Italy and
Emeritus Professor in JNU, New Delhi.

67

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Public Lecture
Professor Vishwanath Pandit, former Professor, Delhi
School of Economics and former Vice-Chancellor,
Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning Prasanthi
Nilayam, Anantapur (Dt), Andhra Pradesh, delivered
lecture on ‘’Ethics Oriented Economic Policy” on 13
February, 2017.

Professor, Council for Social Development, Hyderabad
and Dr. G. Sreedevi, Assistant Professor, School of
Economics, University of Hyderabad.

Publications
1.

A. Governance, Resources and Livelihoods of
Adivasis in India: Implementation of PESA
and FRA – March 2017.

Panel Discussion
“Inclusive Growth and Marginalised Groups in India"
held during October 21, 2016 on the eve of
Shri S.R.Sankaran Birthday. The event was presided
over by Director General, NIRD&PR. The Panelists
were Prof. S. Galab, Director of Centre for Economic
and Social Studies (CESS), Hyderabad, Prof. Gopinath
Reddy, Professor at CESS, Prof. Swarna S. Vepa,
Adjunct Professor at CESS, Prof. Indrakanth, RBI Chair

68

Seminar Proceedings and Policy Brief

B. Dynamics of Rural Labour Relations in India
– October 2016
2.

Book
1 Adivasis in India: Resources, Livelihoods and
Institutions’, Bloomsbury, New Delhi,
India- 2016.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER – 9

ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES
To develop a committed and competent cadre of
Young Rural Development Management
Professionals in the country, NIRD&PR has started
academic programmes. A Centre for Post Graduate
Studies and Distance Education was established to
facilitate these programmes (CPGS&DE). As part of it,
the Institute has introduced a one-year residential
Post-Graduate Diploma Programme in Rural
Development Management (PGDRDM) in 2008 with a
capacity of 50 students per batch. The NIRD&PR
started two batches from the year 2014, raising
capacity to 100 per year.

The National Institute of Technology (NIT), Arunachal
Pradesh, has launched M. Tech (Appropriate
Technology and Entrepreneurship Practice)
Programme as a self-sponsored course in
collaboration with the National Institute of Rural
Development & Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR),
Hyderabad, since 2013-14. A brief account of these
programmes is given below:

In view of increasing need for massive trained
manpower in rural development, the NIRD&PR started
Distance Education Programmes in 2010 with one-year
Post-Graduate Diploma Programme in Sustainable
Rural Development (PGD-SRD) initially in
collaboration with University of Hyderabad (UoH). The
Institute has launched a Post-Graduate Diploma
Programme in Tribal Development Management
(PGD-TDM) in 2012 and Post Graduate Certificate
Programme in Geo-spatial Technology Application in
Rural Development (PGC-GARD) in August, 2014.

In the year 2016-17, Centre for PG Studies & Distance
Education (CPGS&DE) conducted two programmes of
Post Graduate Diploma in Rural Development
Management (PGDRDM) concurrently. The PGDRDM
Batch – 11 started from 27 January 2016 and ended by
31 December, 2016. The Batch-12 started from 22
August, 2016 and will be completed by 31 July, 2017.

Post Graduate Diploma In Rural
Development Management
(PGDRDM)

1.

Thirty six students were admitted in the
PGDRDM 2016 (Batch-11), representing 17 from
Southern India, 2 from North-East, 2 from
Northern India, 2 from Western India; 6 from

69

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Central India and 7 from Eastern India. Of them,
11 are girls and the rest are boys with varied
educational qualifications.
2.

Forty three students were admitted in the
PGDRDM: 2016-17 (Batch-12) from different
parts of India viz., Central India, Southern India,
North-East, Northern India, Eastern India. Of
them, 13 are girls and the rest are male students
with varied educational qualifications and five
international in-service students were
sponsored by Centre on Integrated Rural
Development for Asia and the Pecific (CIRDAP).
The international candidates are from
Afghanistan, Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam and
Fiji.

In both the Batches nearly 10 per cent students
represent the Farm Sciences (like agriculture,
horticulture, veterinary science),14 per cent
represent the Science stream, 30 per cent students
Arts and remaining 46 per cent represent courses like
B.Tech, MBA, BBA, BCA, etc.The selection of the Indian
students was done on basis of All India Entrance
Examination followed by Group Discussion and
Personal Interviews.
The three-trimester programme consists of a
classroom component, short and long field works,
Field Attachment (FA), examinations, including
periodical tests, assignments, project reports and final
examination. The classroom component is spread
over three trimesters and the FA component is spread
over six weeks in between Trimester – II and Trimester
– III. The Programme offers Courses with a total of
52.5 credits.

Field Attachment and Rural
Organisational Internship

Students of PGDRDM during their Field Visit

70

The six-week long Filed Attachment (FA) and Rural
Organisational Internship was administered to the

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Batch-10 students from March 1 to April 15, 2016, and
Batch-11 students from 8 August 2016 to 23 September
2016 to sensitise the students to the problems of the
rural society and its dynamics. The Internship
component focuses on institutions, organisational
structures, organisational culture, management
systems, HRD, finance, marketing, value addition, etc.
The organisations for field work included (i) DDU-GKYNIRD&PR (ii) CSV Wardha (iii) Haryana State Rural
Livelihoods Mission (HSRLM) (iv) Gujarat SRLM (v)
Jharkhand State Livelihood Promotion Society (JSLPS)
(vi) MYRADA (vii) Odisha Livelihood Mission (OLM)
(viii) Rajasthan State Rural Livelihood Mission
(RAJVEEKA) (ix) Rural Technology Park, NIRD&PR (x)
SIRD Meghalaya (xi) SERP, Telangana (xii) ICICI
Foundation (xiii) West Bengal State Rural Livelihoods
Mission (WBSRLM) (xiv) Uttarakhand State Rural
Livelihood Misson (USRLM) (xv) Meghalaya State Rural
Livelihood Misson (MSRLM) (xvi) Maharashtra State
Rural Livelihood Mission (MSRLM) (xvii) Assam State
Rural Livelihood Mission (ASRLM), (xviii) Nalco
Foundation (xix) Sanjeevini, among others.

Forum Presentations
As part of the learning exercises, forum presentations
of Experts in the area of Rural Development for the
benefit of the students are organised from time time.

PGDRDM-2016-17: Placement
Scenario
The placement event for Batch-10 was held during 14 May 2016. Reputed organisations participated in the
campus placement event. Of the 36 PGDRDM
students who joined PGDRDM: Batch-10, placements

were provided to all the students. The organisations
participated in the Placement Programme of both the
batches were (i) DDU-GKY (ii) IL&FS (iii) Jharkhand
State Livelihood Promotion Society (JSLPS) (iv) Odisha
Livelihood Mission (v) BRLPs (vi) Rajasthan SRLM (vii)
ICA (viii) Disah Foundation (ix) Meghalaya SRLM, etc.

Diploma Awarding Ceremony for
PGDRDM-2015: Batch-10
Diploma Awarding Ceremony of NIRD & PR PGDRDM
Batch-10, 2016 was held on 30 July 2016. Shri S. P. Singh,
IAS, Special Chief Secretary, Panchayati Raj & Rural
Development Department, Government of Telangana
was the Chief Guest of the occasion. Dr. W. R. Reddy,
IAS, Director General & Chairman, Academic
Committee, NIRD & PR PGDRDM presided over the
Ceremony.

Collaborative Two-year M.Tech
Programme on Appropriate
Technology & Entrepreneurship (ATE)
The Centre organised two-year M.Tech Programme
on Appropriate Technology and Entrepreneurship
(ATE) in collaboration with National Institute of
Technology, Arunachal Pradesh. Four students of third
batch pursued their Third and Fourth Semesters of
the Programme which concluded in May 2017. During
their stay at NIRD&PR, the students worked on themes
& products that included:
z

Start-up Plan for Production and Packaging of
NEERA

z

Setting up Multi-Grain Biscuits Production Unit
in Barauni (Bihar)

71

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Shri S. P. Singh, IAS & Dr. W. R. Reddy, IAS, during Diploma Awarding Ceremony
z

Start-up Plan for Production and Packaging of
Sugarcane Juice

z

Fly Ash Bricks Industry in Jharsuguda, Odisha:
Industry set up to Fulfil Demand-Supply Gap
by Eco-Friendly Production Techniques

Distance Education Courses
At present CPGS&DE offers the following Distance
Mode Courses :
z

One-Year Post Graduate Diploma in Sustainable
Rural Development

z

One-Year Post Graduate Diploma in Tribal
Development Management (PGDTDM)

72

z

One-Year Post Graduate Diploma in Geo-spatial
Technology Applications in Rural Development
(PGDGARD)

NO. OF STUDENTS ENROLLED IN DISTANCE MODE
PROGRAMMES - 2016-17
Courses

Year
2016

2017

PGDSRD

184

251

PGDTDM

40

56

PGDGARD

124

104

Student Support Service : The Centre provides support
to students in their learning and related issues

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

including supply of course material to the students,
the course material sent by post and through email.
Students are able to download the course material
sent by mail. The course materials in PDF format are
user-friendly as the contents of these materials can
be downloaded and accessed via different platforms
like Smart phone, i-Pad, tablets, laptop, etc. Contact
Sessions are conducted at study centres followed by
Semester End Examinations (1st Semester in July and
2nd Semester in December) every year.

The Committee members reviewed the existing
course structure, content and evaluation pattern and
the scope and need of extending the one year
programme to a two-years programme while
retaining the first year programme as it is. The
suggestions focused on raising the rigour and quality
of the programme and further strengthening it to
bring it at par with other institutes that offer
programmes in Rural Development. Various meetings
and workshops were conducted to brainstorm on the

Restructuring of PGDRDM
A review committee was formed under the
Chairmanship of Dr. K. Prathap Reddy, Former Director,
IRMA to re-look at the functioning of the Post
Graduate Diploma in Rural Development
Management (PGDRDM).

above points and a re-structured framework was
suggested to be implemented from PGDRDM-Batch14 onwards. The re-structured framework suggests a
one-year PGDRDM course and a two-years PGDM in
Rural Development. The recommendations will be
examined for initiating steps for restructuring the
programme.

73

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Contact Sessions and Semester End Examinations of PGDSRD&PGDTDM Students

Semester End Examinations of PGDGARD Students

74

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER-10

NEW INITIA
TIVES
INITIATIVES
During 2016-17, with a view to facilitating the on-going
priorities in Rural Development and Panchayati Raj,
NIRD&PR has undertaken new initiatives as follows.

National Seminar on ‘Equity, Access
& Inclusion - Transforming Rural
India Through Financial Inclusion’
A National Seminar on ‘Equity, Access & Inclusion Transforming Rural India through Financial Inclusion’
was organised on July, 18, 2016. Hon’ble Governor of
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Dr. Raghuram G Rajan
delivered the inaugural address.

literacy and consumer protection so that those who
are offered financial products can make appropriate
choices. Hon’ble Governor also emphasised on the
need to introduce innovative mechanisms to deal with
pending loans. He also highlighted the importance of
financial literacy among rural population. In order to
enhance the financial literacy, the RBI Governor felt
that Financial Education should be included in the
school curriculum across the country. Dr. Raghuram G
Rajan observed that the country still has a long way
to go in the process of financial inclusion. We are
steadily moving from mandates, subsidies, and

Appreciating the initiative of NIRD&PR, Hon’ble
Governor said that financial inclusion will be an
important element in ensuring access and equity that
are necessary building blocks for sustainable growth
of our country. He focused on three elements of
financial inclusion: (a) the broadening of financial
services to those people and enterprises who do not
have access to financial services sector; (b) the
deepening of financial services for those who have
minimal financial services; and (c) greater financial

75

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

reliance on the public sector banks for inclusion to
creating enabling frameworks that make it attractive
for all financial institutions to target the excluded,
even while the interests of the excluded are protected
through education, competition and regulation.

Management Development
Programmes on ‘Developmental
Leadership’
NIRD&PR has planned a series of Management
Development Programmes on ‘Developmental
Leadership’for prospective district collectors. Before
giving a final shape to the programme a Consultative
Meeting was held on August 19, 2016 with a view to
seeking views of some of the best working district
collectors who have completed at least two years of
their posting, Rural Development Experts and
Activists.
The first in the series of the above programmes
was held during 27 Feb – 3 March, 2017. The overall
objective of the programme was to sharpen the
fundamental competencies of officers such as
knowledge, skills, attitudes, values and other
personal characteristics that are needed to drive
superior performance in rural development
sector.

Training Programmes on Cashless
Transactions

with various types of cashless transaction methods /
applications such as USSD, POS, Micro ATM, UPI,
Mobile Wallet, etc. A handbook in the form of
“Training Module on enabling digital payments in
Rural India” was also prepared and circulated to the
participants. The handbook, both in English and Hindi
along with presentations/videos are available on the
website of NIRDPR at www.nird.org.in. The strategy,
timelines of training at State level, district level, block
level and enabling cashless transactions at Panchayat
level were also agreed upon by the Master Trainers
during the training programme.

Rural Innovators Startup Conclave
(RISC)
The Institute has established Rural Technology Park
in which the identified innovations / technologies
relevant to rural development are demonstrated with
the help of an entrepreneur and utilise them as
training-cum-production facilities for the respective

The Institute organised a series of training
programmes on cashless transactions for Master
Trainers and National Resource Persons of States at
NIRD&PR during December 2016. The two-day
training enabled the participants to get familiarised

76

technologies.
To encourage the innovators and startups and to
create a platform for them, NIRD&PR organised 'Rural
Innovators Startup Conclave' (RISC-2017) on 23 and

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

24 of March 2017. It is first of its kind for the rural
startups organised in the memory of late Dr. A.P.J.
Abdul Kalam who championed the cause of
technology innovations in rural development. This
initiative for accelarating startup culture in the country
has created a great momentum in favour of
innovations especially by the rural youth of India,

innovations but also collaborate with the conclave.
Over 100 innovators across the country participated
and had their innovations on display.

Components of Conclave
z

Showcase rural products

z

Presentations by various incubators and social
enterprise support networks

z

Presentations by rural entrepreneurs narrating
their success stories

z

Presentations on prototypes startups

z

Interaction with successful entrepreneurs

z

Selection and awarding of the innovations
appropriate to rural India

after flagship programmes such as 'Make in India',
Startup India' and 'Skilling India'. It is seeking to bring
about rural centric innovation and startup movement
in the country.
The Conclave had two sets of participants’ viz.,
Rural Innovators, Startup Technologists, Enablers,
SRLMs, S&T Institutions, National NGOs, Corporate
organisations with a mandate to support social
enterprises. The conclave has invited National and
International entrepreneur support networks and
grant in aid organisations, incubators and accelerators
as well. Besides these, there were Bankers, CSR
support organisations, private institutions and
industry who will not only sponsor and help a few

The event was inaugurated by Shri Y. S. Chowdary,
Honourable Union Minister of State for Science and
Technology and Earth Sciences. In the presence of the
Honourable Minister MoU was signed between
NIRD&PR and AUTODESK for establishment of Design
Centre at RTP which will facilitate innovators to get
trained and develop a virtual design for their
innovations/ technology prototypes and products.

Outcomes
z

Signing of MoU between NIRD&PR Autodesk and Agrobook
in the presence of Shri Y S Chowdary, Hon'ble Union Minister
of State for Science & Technology & Earth Sciences

The conclave served as an opportunity for
innovators to put up their innovations on
display, create partnerships for taking such
innovations from idea to pilot, to scale at field
level and convert that idea into viable business
models, which on a large scale, benefit the
innovator as well as the rural society and rural
economy.

77

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

z

z

Facilitated interface amongst the Innovators /
Technologists / Entrepreneurs; Appropriate
Ministries, Departments of the Government;
Private Foundations and CSR initiatives that
support innovative technologies in various
ways; Banks that can offer financial support;
companies that can commercialise and upscale
small scale ventures; and marketers who can
reach out to the clientele and so on.
NIRD&PR and Autodesk have signed a
memorandum of understanding for the
establishment of a design centre that will
facilitate training and designing products. This
initiative will help innovators to convert ideas
and prototypes into commercial products.
Autodesk will enable startups and
entrepreneurs to use its tools at NIRD&PR free
of cost. This is a facility NIRD&PR is creating
with the help of Autodesk.

z

NIRD&PR has identified the lacuna, where it
requires playing the connector role. It has
brought on board a galaxy of experts such as
mentors, angel investors and corporates for this
purpose.

z

NIRD&PR will be engaging a large number of
volunteer service providers for design
improvement of these products and integrate
these innovations, products and designs in the
rural ecosystem. There are a large number of
willing volunteers - not only in India, but across
the globe - with the kind of capabilities and
expertise for taking these prototypes into
finished products. NIRD&PR will source - cloud

78

source or crowd source - in order to finetune
these innovations.
z

RISC will be an annual feature at NIRD&PR
handholding and mentoring innovators and
connecting the startups with funding agencies.

z

The Institute will make efforts to facilitate
ecosystem for rural innovators and startups as
conducive as possible. It will connect the
funding and mentoring agencies for startups
to become successful.

z

NIRD&PR plans to hold a workshop on Frugal
Innovations. It will be the next best occasion
to meet and get updated on the action taken
on whatever the participants of the conclave
have committed to pursue.

Transforming India by Strengthening
Local Self-Government through
continuous capacity building
In view of growing importance of the PRI and local
self-government system and increased flow of funds
directly to the Institutions, there is a need for a
comprehensive and innovative approach for
systematic capacity building of elected

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

representatives in a time-bound manner. In this
context, it is necessary to have partnership with
various Institutions, who have inclination and
experience for strengthening the capacities of ERs
and functionaries. At the instance of MoPR, NIRD&PR
has taken the initiative to organise conclaves with
the partnering institutions. Two conclaves were held
at NIRD&PR, Hyderabad on 28 December, 2016 and at
Delhi on 15 February, 2017. The third programme for
north-eastern States was held at NIRD&PR-NERC,
Guwahati on 6 March, 2017. The representatives of
various partnering institutions who include
SIRD&PRs, ETCs, NGOs, etc., attended the
programmes.

Capacity Building under Unnat Bharat
Abhiyan – MoU with MHRD
Unnat Bharat Abhiyan (UBA) by Ministry of Human
Resource Development, Government of India is
initiated to meet the challenges of education in 21st
century by fostering knowledge with analytical skills,
logical reasoning and the ability to imagine beyond
the given time. This approach makes sure that we

achieve our goals with the right value system,
sensitivity and responsibility. This Abhiyan is inspired
by the vision of transformational change in rural
development processes by leveraging knowledge
institutions to help build the architecture of an
Inclusive India. The main objective of UBA is to enable
higher educational institutions of India such as IITs,
IIMs, and NITs, etc., to work with the people of rural
India in identifying development challenges and
evolving appropriate solutions/ technologies for
accelerating sustainable growth. It also aims to create
a virtuous cycle between society and an inclusive
academic system by providing knowledge and
practices for emerging professions and to upgrade
the capabilities of both the public and the private
sectors in responding to the development needs of
rural India.

Rural Technology Alliance with
Defence Research & Development
Organisation
To explore the possibilities of working in collaboration
for strengthening of Rural Technology Park (RTP) by
identifying the potential technologies developed by
Defence Research & Development Organisation
(DRDO), the Scientists of Life Sciences Cluster of DRDO
made a presentation of all those technologies
developed by them and presented a compendium of
the same on 6 May, 2016. From the compendium, 17
technologies were identified in view of their
relevance to rural development and they are being
examined by a group of scientists (Rural Technology
Alliance) for bringing them into RTP for dissemination
and transfer of technologies to the rural areas.

79

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

preparation of training calendar and resource
estimation. It acts as a single platform for trainees
and providers to know demand and supply and
facilitates the intermediate processes including
registration, alerts, nomination, attendance of
trainees in a course, certificate generation, feedback,
etc.

ii.

IT Initiatives
As part of efforts to further strengthen the IT
applications in various systems and operations of
NIRD&PR, Training Management Portal (TMP), Smart
Meeting System (SMS) and Rural Connect (RC) were
launched by the Hon’ble Union Minister for Rural
Development Shri Chaudhary Birender Singh.

E-Office Rollout

As part of the National e-Governance implementation
and operationalisation, the e-office platform (File
Management System, Tour Approval, Personal
Management Information System and Leave
Management System) of NIRD&PR was inaugurated
on April 4, 2016. The NERC, Guwahati, has also rolled
out the e-office successfully.

iii.

VC facilities for for SIRDs

As a part of extending support to the SIRDs, VC
facilities are being provided by NIRD&PR to all
SIRD&PRs in a phased manner. The NIRD&PR Video
Conferencing facilities were inaugurated by Secretary
(RD) on 24 May 2016, with the SIRDs of Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Sikkim, Jaipur and Bihar, besides NERC,
NIRD&PR, Guwahati.

iv.
i.

Relaunching of Official Website of
the Institution

Training Management Portal:
It was felt that there is a requirement to update and

With a view to further strengthening the efficiency
and effectiveness of various operations in connection
with the training programmes of the Institute, it was
decided to set up a Training Management Portal (TMP)
developed by NIC, New Delhi. The portal will help in
capturing the training demands/needs for

80

revamp the existing website of NIRD&PR so as to
improve the visual design, visual hierarchy and user
interface of the website as well as facilitate easier
navigation and develop consistency in the overall look
and feel of the site. Further, updation was also

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

required consequent on the restructuring of the
Institute and subsequent changes. Accordingly,
NIRD&PR has designed and developed a new dynamic
website portal, by in-house initiatives. The website
provides detailed information of National and
International Training Programmes, Research, Action
Research, Case Studies and Collaborative Studies, and
has extensive links to all knowledge portals on RD
and PR. The new website is user-friendly, interactive,
rich in content and showcases all happenings in RD
and PR sector. The new user-friendly features such as
on line application for job vacancies, e-learning for
distance mode courses, online RD Journal
management, etc., are also added in the new website.
The website is in line with the Guidelines of Indian
Government Website (GIGW).

v.

Rural Connect (RC)

NIRD&PR has developed a Web based ICT portal ‘Rural Connect’ to capture the best and innovative
practices in rural development and panchayati raj. It
will be a platform to share the experiences, grassroots
realities, initiatives, etc., relating to different facets
of development scenario. It will help document, rich
knowledge on RD&PR giving a strong base for a
powerful learning ground for all.

vi.

Smart Meeting System (SMS)

Smart Meeting System created by the NIRD&PR is a
very crucial ICT tool for managing the meetings
conducted from time to time by various authorities.
The system will bring in accountability and thus very
effective implementation of decisions taken in
various meetings. Smart Meeting System is one of the
major IT interventions for better governance.

Consultative Workshop on
Transforming India - Role of
NIRD&PR
A Consultative Workshop on “Transforming India: Role
of NIRD&PR” was held on 14-15 May, 2016 involving
eminent Development Practitioners, Social Scientists,
Natural Science Professionals and Developmental
Administrators, Heads and Faculty Members of
NIRD&PR-Centres. The themes of the Workshop
included: (i) Sustainable livelihood interventions
(Farm & non-farm), (ii) Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship, (iii) Technology and Innovations
for creating wealth and equity, (iv) Water, Sanitation,
Nutrition and Health, (v) Financial Inclusion, (vi) Social
Justice, Equity and Gender mainstreaming, (vii)
Infrastructure (Roads, Housing, Marketing
Infrastructure & Value Creation), (viii) Institutions
(Human resource development, capacity building and
empowerment of Panchayats and SHGs). Based on
the recommendations of the workshop, action plans
with short, medium and long-term objectives have
been prepared. Summary of the deliberations of the
workshop is at Annexure-XIV

NIRD&PR Strategic Vision Plan 2030
In the context of the new challenges and the need
for achieving Sustainable Development Goals 2030,
the NIRD&PR will have to evolve training, research
and action research perspectives. In other words, a
proactive approach will help visualise the state of
development in the ensuing decades and to develop
strategic plan by the Institute for 2030. It is in this
context, a Consultative Workshop on ‘NIRD&PR

81

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Strategic Vision Plan 2030’ at NIRD&PR, Hyderabad

priorities for action in the coming years. Secondly, it

was held during March 14-15, 2017. The main

was aimed at operationalising the recommendations

objective of the Workshop was to have the benefit of

of Prof. Alagh Committee on Restructuring of NIRD&PR

reflections and ideas from different stakeholders on

and developing strategic plan for the newly

the role of NIRD&PR, in the changed context and

constituted Schools and Centres.

82

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER - 11

DOCUMENT
ATION
DOCUMENTA
AND INFORMA
TION
INFORMATION
DISSEMIN
ATION
DISSEMINA

Success of rural development programmes, among
other things, depends on access to information which
is one of the critical inputs in the process of rural
development. Provision of timely and relevant
information to different stakeholders is of prime
importance for effective implementation of
development programmes and achieving desired
results. Centre for Development Documentation and
Communication (CDC) at NIRD&PR besdies providing
information support to the research and training
activities of the Institute and also to other members
of development community, has been engaging itself
in identifying and collecting rural development
literature and systematically documenting the same
for effective and wider dissemination. A rich

collection of books, journals and CDs/VCDs on rural
development and allied aspects gathered over the
years is the strength of the NIRD&PR and constitutes
the information resource base for disseminating the
information. The Institute brings out various
publications and offers information services in its
endeavour to effectively disseminate rural
development information to the stakeholders.

Information Sources
Books
Books, reports and other institutional publications
form major source of information. During the period
under review, the Institute added a total of 305 books

83

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

and other documents to its collection. This addition
has made the total collection to 122042.

Periodicals
The Institute subscribed to 143 Indian and foreign
journals during the period under review. 43 journals
are received on exchange and complimentary basis
and about 50 newsletters are received from different
rural development institutions. CDC also subscribed
to on-line databases viz., Indiastat.com, JSTOR and
ProQuest-Social Science Journals and ebrary Social
Science Collection (e-Books).

CD Rom/Video Cassettes
Audio-visual materials form a major input in the
training programmes organised by the institute. Total
collection of CDs is 992.

Hindi Section
The Institute maintains a separate collection of Hindi
books for the benefit of participants and staff. Based
on necessity and demand there is regular addition of
books in this section.

84

Updation of Databases
Computerised databases of books and journal articles
updated and maintained on a continuous basis form
the major strength of NIRD&PR. Based on these
databases, the Institute provides various information
services. Presently the database consists of 93240
books and 125188 references in journal articles.

CDC Information Products/Services
CDC Alerts (Monthly), CDC RD Index (Monthly) and
Newspaper clippings are the information products
through which CDC disseminates information. All
these publications were brought out regularly during
the period under review. In addition, CDC provides
services like literature searches, photocopying, interlibrary loan, etc., to its users.

Institutional Membership
NIRD&PR Institutional Membership offered to rural
development organisations and institutions is
maintained by CDC. The members are entitled to free
subscription to Journal of Rural Development,
NIRD&PR Newsletter and all un-priced publications
and 50 per cent discount on all priced publications of
NIRD&PR.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Library statistics from April, 2016 to March, 2017
1.

Total stock as on 31-3-2017

1,22,042

(Including general books, Hindi books, bound volumes, books in regional language
and grey literature)
2.

Total intake during the year ending 31.3.2017

305

3.

Total A.V Material (Video Cassettes & CDs)

992

Intake during the year ending 31.3.2017
4.

2

Periodicals subscribed

143

Periodicals received on exchange

27

Periodicals received on gratis

16

Newsletters

50

Total periodicals intake

236

Number of Newspapers subscribed
5.

28

Utilisation of CDC Library Facilities-Number of borrowers
Number of documents lent to participants

1012

Number of visitors to Library

8057

6.

Research Scholars visited library

7.

Documentation Services-Number of articles indexed during the year

8.

322

30
1300

Number of CDC Alerts issued

12

Number of CDC Index issued

12

CDC Database
Number of entries in the database (books)

93519

Number of articles

126086

Number of literature searches carried out from the database

The Institute has a mandate to disseminate
information on rural development and Panchayati
Raj. In fulfilling the mandate, the Institute brings out
regularly a quarterly journal, a monthly newsletter,

132

research highlights, and Rural Development Statistics.
As a leading publisher of rural development literature
in India, NIRD&PR endeavours to share its research
findings, observed field realities and views on issues

85

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

of current topical importance with policy planners,
academics and others through its regular publications,
occasional papers, etc. The publications of NIRD&PR
serve the policy makers in terms of providing
feedback of ground level realities and offer
suggestions and guidelines for better planning and
management of rural development programmes.

Digital Resources
Databases: The Centre for Development
Documentation and Communication (CDC), NIRD&PR
has CDs/DVDs on rural development and allied
subjects to be considered as a part of the electronic
library. The major parts in the e-database are
proquest, jstor and Indiastat.com. Proquest and jstor
cover databases on various topics in rural
development and other fields of social sciences. Each
of these databases claims huge number of journals,
books, reports, etc., in digital form. Jstor covers 75
disciplines and proquest consists of 6 billions digital
pages.
Procurement: The Library has exclusive collection of
993 CDs on various topics on rural development. 28
online journals of Sage publications are the recent
additions. Access to these SAGE journals is IP enabled
and hence, available on LAN only.
Information Products: The publication of NIRD&PR
journal i.e the Journal of Rural Development apart
from print has been made available online from the
year 2010 under the head ARCHIVES on NIRD&PR
Home page. Research Highlights are available online
from the year 2006 onwards. Annual reports are also
uploaded on NIRD&PR website from the year 2011
onwards. A few of NIRD&PR Research Reports are
also made available online. The Newsletter i.e

86

PRAGATI is available online from 2012 onwards.
Information Products of the Centre i.e RD Index and
CDC Alerts are monthly issues which are regularly
circulated online to all faculty. In addition to the above
mentioned materials, news articles on rural
development identified from newspapers are made
available online on regular basis. Each news item is
classified and is arranged alphabetically.The volume
of one month news is organised daily and shared as
the News Digest with NIRD&PR fraternity in electronic
form.

Film Festival on Rural Development
The Centre for Development Documentation and
Communication (CDC) organised a National Film
Festival on Rural Development (November 24-15,
2016) as part of the Foundation Day Celebrations of
the Institute. The main objective of organising the
festival was to promote the Audio Visual medium in
research studies related to rural development and to
encourage amateur filmmakers of the country to carry
out film making in rural development sector. The Film
Festival was organised in collaboration with Film and
Cultural Society of North East, Guwahati.

Publications
Journals and Periodicals
The quarterly Journal of Rural Development (JRD) is
the flagship publication of NIRD&PR and is one of the
leading academic journals in the field of rural
development and decentralised administration. With
impressive circulation both within and outside the
country, it is one of the most sought-after journals by
the academic community, rural development

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

administrators and planners. JRD has, over the years,
built up a reputation for high standard of articles and
promptness of publication.
The papers received for publication are reviewed
thoroughly at different levels, both by the NIRD&PR
faculty and the outside subject matter specialists to
ensure quality. During the year, four issues of JRD
(Vol.35 No.2, 3 and 4 and Vol.36 No.1) containing 32
articles and 4 book reviews were brought out.
The Journal of Rural Development (JRD) has also gone
online with regard to the processing of articles. From
June 2016 onwards, the JRD papers are being accepted
only online. A separate web portal, Online Journal
Management System (OJMS) has been developed to
facilitate submissions and acceptance of articles
online. A new system of plagiarism check was also
introduced to enhance the standard of content
published in the Journal.

Other Publications
Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY)
1.

Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY)
Performance Progress Report Volume - I

2.

Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY)
Performance Progress Report Volume - II

3.

Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) National
Overview of Performance Progress Report

SR Sankaran Chair
1.

Dynamics of Rural Labour Relations in India
(Proceedings)

2.

National Seminar on Governance, Resources
and Livelihoods of Adivasis in India:
Implementation of PESA and FRA (18-19
November, 2016) - (Proceedings)

3.

Development by Dispossession- Amit Bhaduri
(Public Lecture Series No.1)

4.

Ethics Based Economic Policy for Rural
Development- V ishwanath Pandit (Public
Lecture Series No.2)

5.

Inclusive Growth and Marginalised Groups in
India (Panel Discussion)

6.

National Seminar on Governance, Resources
and Livelihoods of Adivasis in India:
Implementation of PESA and FRA, 18-19
November, 2016 (Policy Brief)

NIRD&PR Newsletter
The NIRD&PR Newsletter ‘’Pragati’’ a monthly
publication, highlights the recommendations of
various training programmes, seminars and
workshops, and important events which are
undertaken by NIRD&PR on a regular basis. The
Newsletter covers the news of faculty development,
success stories, visits and delegations – both Indian
and foreign – to the Institute, etc. Through this
medium, NIRD&PR maintains regular contacts with
SIRD&PRs, DRDAs and NGOs. Newsletters No. 251 to
No. 262 covering issues from April 2016 to March 2017
were brought out during the year.

Gender Sensitisation
1.

Training Manual on Gender Sensitisation and
Social Action

87

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Agriculture
1.

Resource Guide for Community Managed
Sustainable Agriculture

Practices for Sustainable Development
8.

SRD 508 - Project: Guidelines for Formulation
and Execution

Social Audit

9.

GARD 507 - Satellite Remote Sensing - II

1.

10.

GARD 508 - Spatial Data Analysis and Modelling

11.

GARD 510 - Natural Resource Management

Social Audit: A Manual for Trainers

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act, 2005
1.

Geo-MGNREGA – Standard Operating Manual

2.

Geo-MGNREGA – Booklet on Frequently Asked
Questions

Digital Payments
1.

Training Module on Enabling Digital Payments
in Rural India

Study Material for Post Graduate
Courses
1.

SRD 501 - Rural Society and Sustainable
Development

2.

SRD 502 - Development Methods and
Techniques

3.

SRD 503 - Policies and Programmes for Rural
Development

4.

SRD 504 - Livelihoods and Resources

5.

SRD 505 - Project Planning and Management

6.

SRD 506 - Stakeholders in Rural Development

7.

SRD 507 - Appropriate Technologies and

88

Research Reports
One of the main functions of NIRD&PR is research,
covering impact assessment, monitoring studies,
diagnostic studies, case documentation, etc. The
findings of these research studies are published as
reports every year after suitable editing for wider
dissemination. During the year, the following
Research Report was published:
1.

A Study on Role of Technology in
Entrepreneurship Development and Emerging
Gender Relations in Poor Women

Other Publications
1.

Annual Report - 2015- 16

2.

Annual Accounts - 2015-16

3.

Rural Development Statistics 2015-16

4.

New Rural Paradigm Policies and Governance
(Book)

Faculty Publications
The details of papers and publications of faculty
members are given at Annexure-XV.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER – 12

NIRD&PR – NOR
TH-EASTERN
NORTH-EASTERN
REGION
AL CENTRE, GUWAHA
TI
REGIONAL
GUWAHATI
The North-Eastern Regional Centre of the National
Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj
(NIRD&PR-NERC) was established in July 1983 at

Guwahati with the aim to orient its training and
research activities to the specific needs and potentials
of North Eastern States of India.

NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati Campus

89

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Mandate
¾

¾

Conduct training programmes, conferences,
seminars and workshops for senior
development executives.

¾

Undertake, aid, promote and coordinate
research on it’s own or through other agencies.

¾

Analyse and provide solutions to problems
encountered in planning and implementation
of the programmes for rural development,
natural resource management, decentralised
governance, IT applications, Panchayati Raj
and related issues.

Disseminate information through periodicals,
reports and other publications in furtherance
of the basic objectives of the Institute.

Training
Clientele Groups
¾

Government Officials at State, district and block
levels

¾

NGO executives

¾

Elected Representatives

¾

Academicians

Participants of a training programme at Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam Conference Hall

Training Programmes Organised:
2016-17
Eighty eight programmes including the programmes
of NRLM Resource Cell were conducted during the
year involving 3028 participants with an average
participation exceeding 34 participants per
programme. The programmes include 79 training

90

courses, 7 workshops and 2 seminars. Female
participation per programme was about 10. Seventy
programmes were conducted on campus while 18 offcampus programmes were conducted at various
SIRD&PRs and other institutes in the region. The
details of programmes organised during the year are
at Annexure-III. A brief account of the programmes is
given below.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Profile of Participants: 2016-17
S. No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Categories of participants

No. of participants in each category

Govt Officials
Financial Institutions
ZPCs & PRIs
NGOs
Natl/ State Instts for Res.& Trg
Univ/ Colleges
International
Others (SHGs, Farmers, Unemployed Youth)

Themes of Training/Workshops/Seminars ¾

1077
62
151
94
1289
67
0
288
Integrated Planning

¾

Rural Livilihoods

¾

Skill Development in Farm Sector

¾

Digital Payment Systems

¾

¾

Swachh Bharat Mission

Convergent Planning, Implementation and
Monitoring of RD Programmes

¾

Double Entry Accounting System

¾

Management Information System

¾

Planning and Management of Watershed
Programmes

¾

Promotion of Rural Startups

¾

Rural Research Methodology

¾

Behavioural Skills

¾

Geo-Spatial Technologies

¾

e-Governance and Open Source ICT Applications

PRA Exercises at the Bahtola Organic Village under Dimoria Block, Assam during Rural Research Methodology Training
Programme

91

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

State-wise Participants Attended :
2016-17
North-Eastern Region
S. No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

State
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Sikkim
Tripura
Total

No. of Participants
172
991
90
767
342
136
80
179
2757

Other States
S. No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

State
Maharashtra
Bihar
Delhi
Jharkhand
West Bengal
Odisha
UP
AP
Andaman
Tamil Nadu
Karnataka
Kerala
Rajasthan

No. of Participants
8
47
45
23
59
3
11
1
31
7
8
22
6
271

Release of information poster during a training programme on Digital Payment System

92

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Research Including Consultancy
NERC undertakes research on area-specific problems
of North-Eastern Region. These include both
diagnostic and programme-oriented research studies
in different States of the region.

Themes of Research : 2016-17
¾
¾
¾
¾
¾
¾

IWMP Evaluation studies
Promotion of rural livelihoods
Village Development Plan under PMAGY
Impact of rural road connectivity initiatives
Geo-database on shifting cultivation by
rotation cycle using geo-spatial technologies
Traditional Knowledge in Farming Sector

NERC team with local people during a field visit for a research study to Padumpathar and Dhansiripar in Golaghat district
and Pabhoi in Biswanath Chariali district in Assam

Research Studies : 2016-17
Altogether 18 research studies under the categories
of NIRD&PR, Consultancy and Action Research were

undertaken during the year of which 5 have been
completed and 13 are in various stages of
completion. The status of these research projects is
given at Annexure-XVI and XVII.

Publications
The list of publications of Faculty Members is given
at Annexure - XVIII.

NERC field Investigating team collecting data from villages under BTAD and Nalbari in Assam for research study

93

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Training for Indian Economic Service
(IES) Officers of 2015 Batch
Under the Probationary Training programme for the
officer trainees of Indian Economic Service (IES) of
2015 batch, 12 IES officers have undergone one-week
orientation training at NIRD&PR-NERC on ‘Potential
of North-Eastern Region towards Rural Development’
during 16-20 May 2016. The training was sponsored
by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic

Affairs, Government of India and was inaugurated by
Shri C. K. Das, IAS (retd.), Hon. Member, North-East
Council (NEC). In his inaugural speech he highlighted
the importance of this region and its great potential
for rapid economic development. He later delivered
a lecture on ‘Act East Policy’ and the role of NorthEastern Council.
Eminent resource persons from the region were
invited to deliver talks on various relevant topics that
include socio-economic and environmental

Trainee officers with chief guest Shri C. K. Das, IAS, retd.( 4th from left in the seating row) Hon. Member, North-East Council
and the director & faculty of NERC

background of North-East India, Industrial Policy,
Entrepreneurship Growth and Economic
Development, Local Self-Government institutions in
North Eastern States, Rural Banking Scenario in NER –
Problems & Prospects, Potential of Agriculture and
Allied Sector in economic development, Skill
Development and Employment Generation in NEROptions & Opportunities, Eco Tourism and its
potential, Potential of Water Resources and its
effective utilisation and Export Potential from NorthEast India. Field visits were arranged to expose these

94

young officers to the great potentialities of NE region.
Their interaction with farmers facilitated better
understanding of the socio-economic scenario
prevailing in the villages of Meghalaya. They were
taken to Sohliya village in Meghalaya where they
spent night in the village and interacted with
members of strawberry growers association. Next day
they were taken to Floriculture farm under ‘Zoper
Export’ and ‘Dewli Farm’ under Government of
Meghalaya apart from visiting Cherapunji and other
eco-tourism destinations.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Trainee officers interacting with officials of a Floriculture farm at Meghalaya

Students' Exposure Visits

Government of India as a part of the Surya Mitra Skill
Development Training Programme.

A group of 32 MSW students including faculty
members from Don Bosco University visited
NIRD&PR-NERC on August 26, 2016. Another group
comprising 46 students and faculty from North-East
Institute of Social Science and Research visited
NIRD&PR-NERC on November 3, 2016. NERC faculty
interacted with the visiting members and presented
them a gist of various interventions initiated by the
Institute along with other social activities in the NE
region. On 14 February, NERC again received a team
of 32 students under the banner of National Power
Training Institute, sponsored by Ministry of Power,

95

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Painting Competition
As part of NIRD&PR foundation day celebration 2016,
a painting competition among school students was
organised on 18 November 2016 at the premises of
the Institute. Altogether 42 students from six schools
enthusiastically participated in the event.

Health Camps
Lawrence and Mayo Company organised a day-long
free eye care benefits under the corporate eye
screening programme of the company for the officers,
staff and employees of NIRD&PR–NERC on 21
December 2016.

Surya Mitra Solar PV Skill
Development Programme: On–The–
Job Training
National Power Training Institute (NPTI), NorthEastern Region, Guwahati conducted 12-weeks Surya
Mitra Solar PV Skill Development Programme for a
batch of 32 students. As part of practical training, the
students attended 3 day on–the–job training at 100
KWp Solar off–Grid Power Project/Plant located at
the NIRD&PR-NERC Campus during February 20-22,
2017. The trainees have undergone various
operational & maintenance features and other
technical aspects of solar power plant during this on–
the–job training. The programme was coordinated by
Shri Prabhas Ankuri from NPTI and Shri S.K Ghosh from
NIRD&PR-NERC.

96

Eye Care Camp organised at NERC

Video-Conferencing System
In order to give boost to the communication and
interactions, NIRD&PR initiated the process of
implementing video-conferencing system at NERC,
Guwahati and all SIRD&PRs across the country. The
project is being implemented in collaboration with
NICSI, New Delhi, a unit of National Informatics
Centre. The video conferencing system at NERC
alongwith NIRD&PR, Hyderabad and few SIRD&PRs
was inaugurated by the Secretary, RD, Government
of India on 24 May 2016. The new IP based video-

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

conferencing system at NERC is now being used for
organising lecture sessions, seminars, workshops,
administrative meetings, interactions with
headquarters, Ministry and other institutes across the
country instantly and in a very cost-effective manner.

e-Office
The Government of India, in recognition of the longfelt need for efficiency in government processes and
service delivery mechanisms, has included e-Office
as a core mission mode project under the National eGovernance Plan. This aims at significantly improving
the operational efficiency of the Government by
transitioning to a "Less Paper Office". Use of e-Office
would create more efficient and transparent office

work environment eliminating huge amount of paper
work. e-Office has been pioneered by National
Informatics Centre to support governance using more
effective and transparent inter and intra-government
processes. Keeping track with the ‘Digital India’
programme, NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati also initiated
the process of implementing e-Office. The e-Office
was inaugurated by Dr. W.R Reddy, IAS, Director
General, NIRD&PR on 23 June 2016 during his visit to
the Institute. Initially the file management system
(e-File) component of the product is to be used
extensively to do away with the physical files. The
other features like knowledge management system,
leave management system, etc., will be used in a
phased manner.

Biometric Attendance System
NIRD&PR-NERC introduced Biometric System from
April 1, 2016 along with physical attendance register.
This new attendance system was inaugurated by Dr.
R. M Pant, Director, NERC. It was decided to completely
do away with the old hardcopy attendance register
and use only the biometric attendance system w.e.f
1 July, 2016.

97

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

IP Based Surveillance System

Vermicomposting Unit at NERC

IP surveillance is a digitised and networked version
of closed-circuit television (CCTV). In an IP
surveillance system, an Internet protocol camera, or
IP camera, is a type of digital video camera commonly
employed for surveillance, and which, unlike analog
closed circuit television (CCTV) cameras, can send and
receive data via a computer network and the Internet.
In order to enhance the security measures within the
campus of NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati, 24 IP cameras
have been installed recently covering the important
areas like main entrance gate, administrative building,
hostels corridors, campus road, etc. NVR device with
a big size monitoring screen has been installed at a
centralised location for better surveillance.
Moreover, the cameras are configured with the LAN
router for accessing live videos by the authorised
users through their smart phone app from anywhere
anytime in the world. This is a big boost for the
campus security and better office management at
NERC.

Vermicomposting using earthworms for effective
recycling of organic wastes to the soil is an
environmentally acceptable means of converting
waste into nutritious composts for crop production.
Vermicompost plays a major role in improving growth
and yield of different field crops, vegetables, flower
and fruit crops.

98

At NIRD&PR-NERC campus there is a significant
production of organic wastes from hostel kitchen,
Guest house, staff quarters and the campus garden.
For so long these wastes were either disposed of by
burning or thrown into the pit. At the initiative of
Dr.R.M.Pant, Director, two ready-made polythene
vermicompost pits were installed at the garden in
order to recycle these organic wastes generated from
the campus where they are dried and used for
vermicompost production. At present, the Eisenia
fetida species of non-burrowing type of earthworms
were used for production of vermicompost. This unit
also attracts attention of trainees and serves as a
demonstration unit.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Activities of NRLM-Resource Cell,
NIRD&PR- NERC, Guwahati
NRLM Resource Cell, NIRD & PR NERC was set up by
the Ministry of Rural Development in August, 2015,
to facilitate capacity building initiatives for the
stakeholders of State Rural Livelihood Missions
(SRLMs) of the North-Eastern States.

Objectives of Resource Cell
•

•

•
•

To strengthen the implementation of NRLM
through capacity building of North-East States'
SRLMs.
To facilitate continuous support of trained
National, State, District, Field professionals
from NRLM Resource Cell to all the SRLMs.
To plan and design demand based activities for
the SRLMs of North-East Region.
To document best practices of North-Eastern
Region and develop training modules and
materials.

Summary of Programmes conducted
by NRLM Resource Cell : 2016-17
The programmes are developed as per
NRLM protocols and as per the needs of the
North-East SRLMs. A total of 33 trainings and
workshops were conducted during 2016-17 as
detailed below:
The programmes were conducted for different
stakeholders such as SRLM staff, bankers, CBOs and
Panchayati Raj Institutions/Village Council members
during 2016-17. Training and workshops on staff
induction, Village Organisation (VO) concept seeding
& management, financial inclusion, livelihoods,
transaction based SHG Management Information
System (TBMIS) & Bank linkage portals were held.
Field visits were also undertaken by the NRLM RC
team to enhance the understanding of participants
on livelihoods practices, convergence and federation
structures of NE States in the context of NRLM.

A Training on Financial Management at NERC

99

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

FY

2016-17

Campus Training
Programmes at
NIRD&PR-NERC

Coordinated
Programmes at
NIRD & PR, NERC

No. of
prog.

Participants

No. of Participants
prog.

17

674

5

389

Types of Programmes Conducted
S. No. Programme Types

1
2
3
4
5

No. of Participants
Programme attended
conducted
in each
type of
programme

Workshop
Training
Induction
Orientation
Writeshop

3
21
5
1
1

173
784
285
26
89

Grand Total

31

1357

Off-Campus
Programmes
No. of Participants
prog.
9

294

Total

No. of Participants
prog.
31

1357

Bengal. North Eastern SRLMs of Mizoram, Tripura,
Meghalaya, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh also
participated in the Workshop.
The broad topics/issues covered in the workshop as a
part of presentation, discussion and reflection
include: Convergence Framework and Expectations,
Schematic Convergence for GPDP, Convergence and
Yojana Banao Abhiyan, PRI-CBO Convergence, Process
of Convergence from PAE to GP2RP, PAE as Baseline
and M & E Tool, Road Map, Specific Output, Milestone,
Reporting System.

National Workshop on Convergence
A National level Workshop on Convergence was
organised at NERC, Guwahati. It was hosted by NRLM
Resource Cell, and North-Eastern Regional Centre
(NERC), Guwahati. It was supported by the
Kudumbashree - National Resource Organisation
(NRO) and Assam State Rural Livelihoods Mission
Society (ASRLMS). The Kudumbashree-NRO provided
technical support whereas the ASRLMS provided field
visit support. A total of 91 professional participants
from nine State Rural Livelihoods Missions, which
have already adhered to convergence interventions,
participated in the programme. The participating
SRLMs were- Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Bihar,
Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, U.P, and West

100

A demo on PRI-CBO Convergence by Village Organisation
members during field visit to Kathoni village in Lahorighat
block under Morigaon district

Livelihoods Workshop
A livelihoods workshop was organised during 28-30
September 2016 at NIRD&PR, NERC by NMMU NRLM
in partnership with NRLM RC, NERC, Guwahati. Four

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

SRLMs namely Mizoram, Nagaland, Meghalaya and

ninth day, participants shared their field visit

Tripura

Livelihoods

experience and also prepared their State-wise plans.

professionals, resource persons from Pradan, Tata

On the last day, the State representatives shared their

Trust and its partners and MKSP partners of ASRLMS

plans and were requested to approve the same by

also participated in the workshop. The objective of

their respective SMDs for further action. NRLM NRPs,

the workshop was to facilitate preparion of livelihood

NMMU representatives led by Shri G Muralidhar, NRLM

plans and way forward for rolling out livelihoods and

RC staff from Hyderabad and Guwahati and other local

MKSP implementation in the respective SRLMs.

resource persons facilitated the programme.

participated.

NMMU

State Resource Persons Learning
Programme
The third batch of the State Resource Persons
Learning programme was conducted at NIRD&PR –
NERC during 2-11 June 2016. Participants from Assam,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland, Tripura and
Sikkim attended the programme. The first two days
were generic sessions about NRLM and its processes
and from third day onwards till sixth day the thematic
sessions were conducted. Participants were divided
into five thematic groups: (1. SI-SD, VO, CLF, 2.
Livelihood, 3. FI, 4. Gender and FNHW and 5. CB and
Cadre Management). The seventh and eighth days
were field visits based on the thematic sessions. On

Third Annual Regional Writeshop
for NE SRLMS
The third Annual Regional Writeshop for NE SRLMs
was organised by NRLM RC and NIRD&PR, NERC at
IIBM, Guwahati during 14-18 February 2017. There
were 89 participants from NE SRLMs of Arunachal
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Sikkim & Tripura including NRPs, professionals from
NMMU and officials from MoRD. Ms. Nita Kejrewal,
Director F & A was present throughout the writeshop
programme. The programme was also attended by
Shri Atal Dulloo, JS & MD, NRLM, MoRD, Shri Arup
Ratan Sharma, CEO, Tripura SRLM, Ms. Motsuthung
Lotha, MD, Nagaland SRLM & Mr. TabinSiga, CEO cum
SMD, Arunachal Pradesh SRLM.

101

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER – 13

ADMINISTRA
TION
ADMINISTRATION
Administration wing of NIRD&PR supports and
facilitates faculty members in undertaking training,
research and consultancy activities of the Institute.
The Institute’s policies and strategies are determined
by the General Council. Hon’ble Union Minister for
Rural Development is the President of the Council.
The Management and Administration of the Institute
is vested in the Executive Council with Secretary,
Rural Development as its Chairman and the Director
General is the Member Secretary.
The Institute is headed by Director General, an officer
of All India Services in the rank of Additional
Secretary/ Secretary carrying Higher Administrative
Grade scale/ Apex Scale. The Director General is
responsible for administration of the affairs of the
Institute and shall exercise powers under the
direction and guidance of the Executive Council. The
Director General of the Institute is assisted by
Deputy Director General, Director (Financial
Management) cum Financial Advisor and Registrar
cum Director (Admn.) who in turn are supported by
Assistant Registrars (Establishment & Training),

102

Assistant Financial Advisor & Pay and Accounts
Officer, etc. The Organisation Set-up is depicted in
the following Chart.

General Council
The training, research and consultancy activities
undertaken by the Institute are supported by the
Administrative wing of the Institute. In order to
facilitate and provide a more conducive environment
for carrying out the various activities, action was
initiated to upscale and expand the existing
infrastructure facilities of the Institute. The institute
has its General Council, Executive Council and
Academic Committee to provide guidance on policy,
execution and academic matters, respectively. The
General Council is presided by the Honourable Union
Minister for Rural Development, Government of
India. General Council is responsible for management
and general control of the Institute. The constitution
of General Council for the year 2016-17 as on 31 March
2017 is at Annexure-XIX.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Executive Council
The Secretary, Department of Rural Development,
Government of India is the Chairman of the Executive
Council. Management and Administration of the
Institute is the responsibility of Executive Council
subject to general control exercised and directions
issued by the General Council. The constitution of
the Executive Council as on 31 March, 2017 is at
Annexure-XX.

Academic Committee
Academic Committee under the Chairmanship of the
Director General deals with the matters relating to

research and training including finalisation of Annual
Calendar for training programmes and research
programmes of the Institute. The Director General of
the Institute is the Chairman of the Academic
Committee. The composition of committee is given
at Annexure-XXI.

Restructuring of NIRD&PR
The capacity building of rural development
functionaries and elected representatives of the
Panchayati Raj Institutions is of prime importance
for better implementation of the rural development
programmes. In order to meet the growing challenges
of capacity building for rural development, a

103

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.K Alagh
was constituted by Ministry of Rural Development
(MoRD) to suggest measures for reform and revamp
of the National Institute of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj State Institute of Rural Development
and Panchayati Raj (SIRD&PRs) and Extension Training
Centres (ETCs) which are the nodal institutions
engaged in training and capacity building of the rural
development functionaries at National,State and
district levels.
The Ministry had taken decisions on the
recommendations given in the reports of Dr. Y K Alagh
Committee and Shri S Vijaya Kumar with the approval
of Hon’ble Minister (RD, PR & DWS). In order to mentor
the changes, the Ministry constituted a Transition
Management Committee (TMC) under the
chairmanship of Special Secretary (RD). The decisions
of the Alagh Committee for implementation were
1.

Re-drafting Vision

2.

Formation of Schools and Centres with specific
mandate

3.

Positioning of faculty and supporting staff

104

4.

Restructuring of Committees

5.

Functioning of Transition Management
Committee (TMC)

6.

Formation of Facilitation Committee and
Dispute Resolution Sub-committee

7.

Closure of Regional Centres at Jaipur and Patna

8.

Video-conferencing facilities to SIRDs

9.

Developing networking with institutions of
excellence in rural development and rural
technology

10.

Preparation of Plan of Action for improving
the quality of training and research
programmes

11.

Amendment of Rules & Bye-laws of NIRD&PR.

Out of the above, decisions pertaining to Serial
Number 1 to 10 have been implemented and S.No.11
is initiated and in process. As per the decision of the
Alagh Committee, the Institute has been restructured
into schools having centres within each school with
allocation of faculty based on their options,
qualifications and seniority. The details are given
below.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Schools and Faculty Centres
S. No.

School

Centres within the School

1.

Development Studies &
Social Justice

Centre for Human Resource Development (CHRD)
Centre for Gender and Development (CGAD)
Centre for Equity & Social Development (CESD)
Centre for Agrarian Studies (CAS)
Centre for PG Studies and Distance Education (CPGS&DE)

2.

Rural Livelihoods and
Infrastructure

Centre for Wage Employment (CWE)
Centre for Skills and Jobs (CSJ)
Centre for Financial Inclusion and Entrepreneurship (CFIE)
Centre for Rural Infrastructure (CRI)
Centre for Entrepreneurship Development (CED)
Centre for Livelihoods (CFL)

3.

Sustainable Development

Centre for Natural Resource Management (CNRM)
Centre for Climate Change & Disaster Mitigation (CCCDM)

4.

Public Policy and
Good Governance

Centre for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (CPME)
Centre for CSR, Public-Private Partnership and People’s
Action (CC, PPP & PA)
Centre for Good Governance & Policy Analysis (CGG&PA)

5.

Local Governance

Centre for Panchayati Raj (CPR)
Centre for Decentralised Planning (CDP)
Centre for Social Service Delivery (CSSD)
Centre for Social Audit (CSA)

6.

Science, Technology and
Knowledge Systems

Centre for Geo-informatics Applications in Rural
Development (CGARD)
Centre for Innovations and Appropriate Technologies (CIAT)
Professional Support Centres
Centre for Development Documentation & Communication
(CDC)
Centre for Information & Communication Technology (CICT)
Centre for Research & Training Coordination and Networking
(CRTCN)

A list showing NIRD&PR Faculty and Officers as on
31.03.2017 is at Annexure-XXII.

105

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Staff: Category-wise details of the staff (Including NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati)
Academic Staff
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Category

SC

ST

Others

Total

Ex-Servicemen

Women out of Col.5

Group-A

6

2

30

38

—

13

Group-B

—

—

8

8

—

—

Total

6

2

38

46

—

13

Non-Academic Staff
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Category

SC

ST

Others

Total

Ex-Servicemen

Women out of Col.5

Group-A

2

1

4

7

—

2

Group-B

6

1

22

29

—

9

Group-C

14

4

90

108

3

23

Group-C
(Re-Classified)

40

7

40

87

1

12

Total

62

13

156

231

4

46

General Administration
Director General, as Principal Executive Officer of the
Institute, is responsible for Administration of the
Institute and exercises powers under the direction
and guidance of the Executive Council.
Administration of the Institute is responsible for
coordination, conduct of statutory meetings,

106

establishment and personnel management,
management of guest houses, campus support
services, health services and welfare of the
employees.

Statutory Meetings
The following are the Statutory Meetings held during
the year 2016-17:

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Meeting

Date

Venue

118th Executive Council

21.04.2016

At Ministry of RD, KrishiBhavan, New Delhi

119th Executive Council

26.08.2016

At Ministry of RD, KrishiBhavan, New Delhi

120th Executive Council

06.12.2016

At Ministry of RD, KrishiBhavan, New Delhi

Infrastructure Facilities
The Institute is situated in an area of 174.21 acres with
Infrastructural facilities like faculty buildings,
administrative buildings, well equipped Library, four
A/C guest houses with 223 guest rooms, 11
Conference Halls with seating capacity of 300 persons,
Community Hall, Health Centre, Sports Complex, 219
Residential quarters, Staff Canteen, Creche,
Mahila Mandali, Youth Club, Yoga and Gymnasium
facilities, etc. Action has also been initiated to
construct a new conference hall with state of the art
facility.

IT Infrastructure
NIRD&PR has excellent state-of-the-art Computer
Centre with latest technological facilities with
dedicated connectivity of Internet and Intranet.
NIRD&PR has been recognised as a Centre of
Excellence by the Department of Personnel and
Training, Government of India. The NIRD&PR Network
provides online services for the effective academic,
administrative functions, e-Office, e-Journals,

NIRD&PR gets uninterrupted internet services
through its National Knowledge Network (NKN)
connectivity of 100 mbps and with a redundancy of 33
mbps dedicated link availed from M/s Railtel
Corporation of India. NIRD&PR’s network is
technology intensive providing mail.gov.in domain
by NIC, e-Office, and caters to all the services to the
International and National Participants in campus.
Wi-Fi facilities are available across the campus, office
buildings and Guest Houses. There are two wellequipped CICT Computer Labs and a CGARD GIS State
of the Art Lab are available for training, evaluation,
hand holding, etc., for the International and National
participants, field functionaries, ministry officials,
students, etc. These labs meet the current
requirements of the office, catering to training and
research activities of the Institute and are at par with
industry and meet the emerging needs of the
Institute. The CGARD Lab is engaged for design and
development of in-house GIS Applications for Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj. Some of the
important activities during the year are listed below.
z

Implemented e-Office web based eGovernance System for ensuing transparency
and efficient Governance in NIRD&PR.

z

Developed in-house Smart Meeting System
(SMS) for effective Meeting System and for
ensuing Good Governance.

NIRD&PR e-JRD, IPKN with State, Districts, SIRDs/ETC,
National Institutes, Research Organisations, etc., and
has a 1000-odd hosts in its network range with links
with Government of India, Ministries and
Departments.

107

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

z

Created "Rural Connect" platform that captures
all best practices from field functionaries,
Project Directors across the country.

z

Implemented Training Management Portal
(TMP) for web based end-to-end Training
Management System including Training
Evaluation.

z

Implemented the Video-Conferencing System
for all SIRD&PRs to interact and optimally
utilise the VC facilities for Training, Research,
address by Resource Persons, Review
Meetings, etc.

z

Established a state of the art ICT Centre at
International Convention Centre, CIRDAP,
Dhaka, Bangladesh for the benefit of all CIRDAP
Member Countries which is used for extensive
training, hand holding and sharing development
Case Studies and Best Practices among CIRDAP
Member Countries.

Recruitments
During the year, major recruitments were undertaken.
The Institute initiated to fill several academic and
non-academic posts like Professor, Associate
Professor, Assistant Professor, Administrative Officer,
Assistant Registrar, Senior Fellow, Documentation
Officer, Documentation Assistant, Security Officer,
Assistant Librarian, Garden Superintendent,
Pharmacist, Library & Information Assistant, Junior
Hindi Translator, Stenographer Gr.III, Data Processing
Assistants, Caretaker, etc. As part of technological
intervention, for the first time, the applications from
the candidates were invited online and the process
of scrutiny, shortlisting of candidates was completed
with less involvement of manpower. Of the posts

108

advertised, most of the recruitment process was
completed.
One of the major recruitments was for the academic
post of Associate Professor. In response to the 17 posts
advertised for Direct recruitment and Deputation
basis, the Institute received 353 applications. The
process of scrutiny of applications was done in two
phases i.e. by an Internal Committee and thereafter
by next level of Scrutiny cum Screening Committee
comprising retired faculty members and external
expert members.
Based on the overall recommendations, 113
candidates were called for interview/ test in the
month of March, 2017, out of which, after assessment
by duly constituted Selection Committee, 13
candidates were selected for the post of Associate
Professor. NIRD&PR introduced Psychometric test
which was conducted during the faculty recruitments
to all the shortlisted candidates.

Promotions
During the year, some of the Group A, Group B and
Group C employees such as AFA & PAO, Senior Private
Secretary, Private Secretary, Section Officers,
Assistants and UDCs posts were filled by promotion
following due procedure.Further, compassionate
appointments were also made as per the prescribed
Government of India guidelines/ rules.

Faculty Development
As a part of faculty development and enrichment
process, faculty and non-faculty members of the
Institute are deputed on a regular basis to various

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

seminars, conferences, workshops and training
programmes in India and abroad. The details of faculty
and non-faculty participation in various programmes
during 2016-17 are given at Annexure-XXIII.

Staff Welfare
The Institute continued its support and assistance, as
in the past, to Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan Vidyasram
School located at campus. During the year under
review, a large number of children of NIRD&PR
S.No.

employees availed of the benefits. The Institute has
been providing required support to school for
extension and betterment of infrastructure.
The Institute continued to encourage voluntary effort
in welfare activities by sanctioning grants from the
benevolent fund of the Institute. Grants were provided
for running NIRD&PR crèche in the campus for the
benefit of the staff members of the Institute and also
for activities by the Sports and Recreation Club, etc.
The details of grants sanctioned are as follows:

Funded For

Amount

1

NIRD&PR Sports & Recreation Club

80000.00

2

NIRD&PR Creche

23774.00

3

NIRD&PR Canteen

118000.00

4

NIRD&PR BVBV School

5

Assistance to distressed families of deceased staff

1849881.00

Total
Group C & D employees were given several other
benefits like refundable loans for marriage of children,
refundable loans for higher studies of children, etc., at
very low interest rates from the benevolent fund of
the Institute. The NIRD&PR canteen management was
entrusted to a self-help group.

Progressive use of Hindi as Official
Language 2016-17
Performance of the Institute in the field of Official
Language Implementation was noteworthy, as per
the directions of the Department of Official
Language, GoI., New Delhi. The Institute has been
implementing the Official Language Policy of the
Government from time to time. During the year,
implementation of the Official Language Hindi in the
Institute is as follows:

50000.00
2121655.00

1.

Compliance of Section 3(3) of Official
Language Act. 1963

The Institute is complying Section 3(3) of Official
Language Act. 1963 in toto. All the Name Plates, Sign
Boards and indication plates and name of the Institute
is in Bilingual (Hindi & English). Nearly 944 official
documents and reports under Section 3(3) of Official
Language Act, were issued in Bilingual form.

2.

Bilingual facility is provided in the
computers

All the 531 computers of the Institute have bilingual
facility. The Unicode and APS Software were installed
in the computers.

3.

Hindi Publications of the Institute

During the above period, the following publications
were brought out:

109

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

i)

NIRD & PR Samachar Patra (12 numbers)

ii)

Annual Report - 2015-16

xiii) Women Elected Representative Law and
Awareness - 3 Books

iii)

Annual Accounts - 2015-16

4.

iv)

Grameen Vikas Sameeksha (Bi - Annual Journal)
a. January - June, 2016
b. July - December, 2016

v)

NIRD&PR Training Calendar - 2016-17

vi)

RSETI Samachar Patra “Enterprise” - 4 numbers

vii)

NIRD & PR Profile (Hindi)

viii) Watershed modules - 1 Book
ix)

Geo - MGNREGA - Training modules 2016 - 2
Books

x)

Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana Reports - 4 Books

xi)

Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana “Samanvay” - 15
Books

xii)

Social Audit 2016 - 1 Book

110

Translation work performance in the
Institute

During the year under review, OL Section has
completed about 2500 pages translation in Hindi. The
documents consist of Schedules, RTI letters, Faculty
course material, Annual Report, Annual Accounts, etc.

5. Hindi workshops
One-day Hindi workshops were conducted for officers
and staff of the Institute as below:
i.

One-day workshop for MTS Staff on 15 June,
2016.

ii.

One-day workshop for Group ‘A’ officers on 7
November, 2016.

iii.

One-day workshop for Group ‘C’ employees on
27 March, 2017.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

About 39 officials from Central Government
offices, banks and undertakings attended
the programme, 11 papers were presented
by different officials. Dr. Kousalya. Asst.
Director, Hindi Teaching Scheme, GoI, was
the Chief Guest of the Seminar. Dr. R.M.
Pant, Director, NIRD&PR - NERC also
presented a paper.

6.

b) Two days Rajbhasha Seminar was organised
at NIRDPR - NERC Guwahati.

All India Rajbhasha Seminars
a) One-day All India Rajbhasha Seminar was
organised in the Institute on 22 August, 2016
under the Chairmanship of Registrar and
Director (Admn.) Smt. Chanda M. Pandit.

7.

Organisation of Hindi Fortnight / Hindi
Day Celebration

Hindi Fortnight was celebrated during 12 to 26
September, 2016 in the Institute. Dr. W.R. Reddy, IAS,

111

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Director General, NIRD&PR, presided over the
function. He distributed prizes to all the winners of
the Hindi competition on the occasion of Hindi Day.
During the fortnight, 6 Hindi competitions were
organised, they are:
1.

Sulekh competition (for Group ‘C’ employees
MTS)

2.

Hindi Essay competition

3.

Hindi Quiz competition

4.

Hindi Elocution competition

5.

Hindi Antakshari competition (for staff and P.G.
Diploma students)

6.

Hindi memory competition

In all 150 officers / staff participated in the
competitions.
In addition to these 4 competitions, memory, essay,
poem writing and elocution competitions were
conducted for students of Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan
Vidyashram, located in NIRD&PR premises. A total
of 132 prizes were given away by the principal.

8.

112

Organisation of TOLIC Meeting

First and second meeting of Town Official Language
Implementation committee (TOLIC) was organised
at Dr. S.K. Rau Hall at NIRD&PR under the
Chairmanship of Dr. W.R. Reddy, Director General,
NIRD&PR on 8 June, 2016 and 27 November, 2016.
Shri Tekchand Deputy Director (OL), Regional
Implementation Office, Bengaluru and Dr. Kousalya,
Asst. Director, Hindi Teaching Scheme, MHA, GoI,
Hyderabad represented Rajbhasha Vibhag. Nearly
40 members were present in the meeting from
different TOLIC members offices. The Director
General and Chairman of the TOLIC. Dr. W. R. Reddy
awarded the Rajbhasha Shield for four offices for
their excellent work in the implementation of
Hindi.

9.

Learn a Hindi Word Everyday Scheme

Learn a Hindi word every day scheme is being
implemented in the Institute to enhance the working
knowledge of officers/staff of the Institute. Hindi
quotations were also displayed to create interest in
Hindi among officers / staff of the Institute.

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Development and Prosperity”. Mrs. Vijaya
Bharathi, Advisor, Orvakal Mahila Podupu
Lakshmi Sangham also graced the occasion and
addressed the gathering.

Celebration of 69th Independence
Day (August 15, 2016) and 67th
Republic Day (January 26, 2017)
The Institute celebrated Independence Day and
Republic Day. The Director General hoisted the
Tricolor National Flag at NIRD&PR campus. As a part
of the celebrations, cultural activities by BVBV School
children, spot games, distribution of prizes were
conducted. In addition to it, Blood Donation Camp
was also organised on August 15, 2016

Celebration of Foundation Day
(November 09, 2016)

b)

Cultural and Sports events were organised at
NIRD&PR, with the participation of its
employees and employees of all neighbouring
Institutions. during 15- 20 November, 2016 .
This was aimed at establishing collaborative
work with all the institutions located in
Hyderabad.
c)

NIRD&PR has organised Foundation Day celebrations
commencing from 9 November, 2016 with ‘Swacchata’
as the theme. The following events were organised
in accordance with the theme in the month of
November, 2016:
a)

Cultural and Sports Activities

National Seminar
A National Seminar on “Governance, Resources
and Livelihoods of Adivasis in India:
Implementation of PESA and FRA” was
inaugurated by Shri Ch. V idyasagar Rao,
Hon’ble Governor of Maharashtra and Tamil
Nadu on 18 November 2016. Mr. Tevita G.
BoseiwaqaTaginavulau, Director General,
CIRDAP, Prof. R. Radhakrishna, Chairman of the
Advisory Committee of S.R.Sankaran Chair
(Rural Labour) also graced the occasion. The
dignitaries also released a book on “Adivasis in
India – Resources, Livelihoods and Institutions”
and a booklet on “Dynamics of Rural Labour
Relations in India" comprising the proceedings
of the National Seminar held at NIRD&PR in
March 2016.

Inaugural programme
November, 2016: The Foundation Day
celebrations were inaugurated on 9 Nov, 2016
by Smt. Lalitha Kumaramangalam, Chairperson,
National Commission for Women. She
delivered the Inaugural Lecture on “Women
Entrepreneurship for Sustainable Rural

d)

Film Festival
A Film Festival on Rural Development was
conducted with the participation of North-East

113

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Member of Parliament also visited the Mela
on the 27th of November and addressed the
gathering. Internationally acclaimed tennis
player Ms. Sania Mirza participated in the Mela
on 30 November 2016 and released Sanitation
posters for wider dissemination of the same.
The mela ended with the participant
innovators sharing about the unique features
of their technologies, innovation and products.
Cultural Society. A competition on films in rural
development was held to encourage people
to document issues relating to rural
development and prizes awarded to the best
three adjudged screened films.
e)

Rural Technology & Crafts Mela
A Rural Technology & Crafts Mela was organised
at the Rural Technology Park premises in
NIRD&PR during 24-28 November, 2016. The
Mela was inaugurated in the presence of
former Director Generals of NIRD&PR viz., Shri.
T.L Sankar, Shri. J.M. Lyngdoh, Shri. R.C
Choudhary, Shri. B.K.Sinha and Shri. Mathew
C. Kunnumkal. This was followed by a brain
storming session by the Director General with
the former DGs on the initiatives taken and the
way forward for NIRD&PR. The Hon’ble Union
Minister for State for Drinking Water and
Sanitation, Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi
visited the Technology and Crafts Mela on the
25th of November 2016 and released posters
and other dissemination materials on
Sanitation. Panel discussions on issues related
to Gender, Sustainable Development goals and
Swacchta were held during the five-day mela.
Shri Konda V ishweshwar Reddy, Hon’ble

114

Celebration of International
Women’s Day
The National Institute of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj is committed for achieving gender
equality through enhancing its targeted interventions,
clientele reach at national and international scenario,
through enhanced networking, collaboration, capacity
building programmes, research and action research.On
International Women’s Day March 8, 2017, an action
Seminar was organised to chalk out the gender action
plan for NIRD&PR. To pursue the NIRD&PR strategy to
conduct capacity building programmes at national and
international levels, exchange programmes,
workshops, policy dialogues, research and action
research, the Seminar set the priority areas in gender
and way forward in setting the gender action plan in
NIRD&PR for the next five years in tune with the
Sustainable Development Goals.
The action Seminar was inaugurated by Dr. Tripurana
Venkata Ratnam, Chairperson of Telangana State
Commission for Women. The Guests of Honour were
Dr. Satbir Bedi IAS, Member Secretary of National
Commission for Women and Dr. Sarala Gopalan, IAS
(Retd), former Secretary to the Ministry of Women
and Child Development who set the context for the
deliberations. Nearly 60 members, both from

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

NIRD&PR and external experts were present during
the seminar. Participants were varied across different
walks of life from academics to practitioners;
scientists to journalists; and bureaucrats to grassroots
level workers. External participants are from UN
Women, UNICEF, UNDP, ICRW, ICRISAT, TISS and NGOs.

International Yoga Day Celebration
The ‘International Yoga Day’ was celebrated on 21
June 2016 by NIRD&PR. Employees along with their
family members including children and participants
of the training programmes attended.

Procurement through Government
E-Marketplace (GEM)
Based on recommendations of Group of Secretaries
made to Hon’ble Prime Minister, the Government

decided that GeM SPV will create a one stop
Government eMarketplace (GeM) to facilitate online
procurement of common use Goods & Services
required by various Government Departments /
Organisations / PSUs. GeM aims to enhance
transparency, efficiency and speed in public
procurement. It provides the tools of e-bidding,
reverse e-auction and demand aggregation to
facilitate the government users achieve the best value
for their money. The purchases through GeM by
Government users have been authorised and made
mandatory by Ministry of Finance by adding a new
Rule No. 149 in the General Financial Rules, 2017.
NIRD&PR and NERC, Guwahati have registered with
the GeM for procuring various office items through
this government online platform. A number of

115

important items are procured using GeM direct
purchase/ bid feature.

Good Governance Initiatives
i.

E-Office Rollout

As part of the National e-Governance
implementation and operationalisation, the e-office
platform (File Management System, Tour Approval,
Personal Management Information System and Leave
Management System) of NIRD&PR was inaugurated
on April 4, 2016. The NERC, Guwahati, has also rolled
out the e-office successfully.
ii.

Smart Meeting System(SMS)

Smart Meeting System created by the NIRD&PR is a
very crucial ICT tool for managing the meetings
conducted from time to time by various authorities.
The system will bring in accountability and thus very
effective implementation of decisions taken in
various meetings. Smart Meeting System is one of
the major IT interventions for better governance.

Implementation of Right to Information (RTI)
Act, 2005
Keeping in view the spirit of transparency and
statutory obligations, the Institute has taken steps to
implement the provisions of Right to Information Act,
2005 for providing information to citizens of the
country in compliance with the same. NIRD & PR
website provides details of mandatory disclosures as
provided under RTI Act, 2005. The Institute has
designated Appellate Authority, Public Information
Officer, two Assistant Public Information Officers and
Transparency Officer for providing information sought
by the RTI applicants and their names are also
displayed in the NIRD&PR website. The Institute also
has separate Appellate Authority and Public
Information Officer for its North-Eastern Regional
Centre (NERC) at Guwahati. During the year 2016–17,
67 RTI applications and appeals on various issues as
indicated below were received from citizens and
were disposed of as per the procedures and
information available and records were made
available to the RTI applicants. The Institute also
submitted mandatory online quarterly returns, as per
procedure. The break-up of applications is given in
the figure given below.

Projects

Educational Programmes

Service Matters/Court
Matters/Recruitment
Publications

Appeals

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

CHAPTER - 14

FIN
ANCE AND A
CCOUNTS
FINANCE
ACCOUNTS
NIRD&PR is a central autonomous body funded by

the same to the Ministry, as required under the GFRs.

Ministry of Rural Development for all its activities.

Grants released under Plan and Non-Plan heads are

Every year, as per the approved budget, the Ministry

utilised to meet the expenditure on core activities of

releases grants under Plan and Non-plan heads

the Institute like capacity building, research,

(Salaries and General heads from 2017-18 onwards).

development, seminars & conferences, Rural

Grants are also released for specific capital

Technology Park, Publications, subscription to

expenditure, based on the proposals from NIRD&PR

journals, library, maintenance and other recurring &

and as per requirement. The Finance and Accounts

non-recurring expenditure. In addition to the above,

Division of the Institute is entrusted with the

NIRD&PR also receives funds from various Programme

functions of Budgeting, Pay & Accounting of funds,

Divisions of MoRD to spearhead the various flagship

Preparation of Annual Accounts, etc. The division

programmes of the Government of India in rural sector

ensures regular monitoring of expenditures through

like Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushal Yojana

monthly reporting of balances under projects to the

(DDU-GKY), Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY),

Director General as well as regular reporting of

Rurban Mission, Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY), MGNREGA,

expenditures vis-a-vis grants released, to the

capacity building under Social Audit, NRLM, RSETI, etc.

Ministry. Separate accounting ledgers are maintained

Funds are also received from various other Ministries,

for each activity/sponsored programme and all

State Governments, International bodies of United

transactions pertaining to the activity are recorded

Nations, PSUs, other organisations like NABARD, etc.,

therein for proper budgetary control and accuracy.

for research, impact assessment, capacity building,

The division also prepares the Utilisation Certificates

which are specific to the requirement of the funding

in respect of the grants released for submission of

agencies.

118

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

For the financial year 2016-17, the expenditure of the
Institute is ` 62.25 crore against the Grants released
to the tune of ` 58.83 crore. The deficit of grants of
` 3.42 crore was met from the internal resources. The
status of release of grants in aid vis-a-vis expenditure
incurred during the last three years is indicated as
below:
(Rupees in Crore)
Year

Total Grants

Expenditure

2014-15

52.04

57.79

2015-16

57.23

67.64

2016-17

58.83

62.25

As laid down in the GFRs 2017- No. 229(iv) and with
the approval of Executive Council, the Institute
established a Corpus Fund in 2008-09. The main
objective of the Corpus Fund is to achieve long-term
financial stability of the Institute and to meet
expenditure on specific developmental projects/
studies/programmes. As on 31 March 2017, the
balance of Corpus Fund stood at ` 172.47 crore.
Besides, the Institute also established the
Development Fund, Benevolent Fund, Provident
Fund, Building Fund & Medical Corpus Fund which
are object oriented with specific purpose. The brief
details of the funds are given below:
Development Fund was established in the early
Eighties to enhance the training and research
facilities in the Institute, provide financial assistance
to meritorious NIRD&PR staff/officers for higher
education, finance specific developmental projects
of the Institute, etc. Benevolent Fund was also
established in the same period for providing staff

welfare measures like children’s education loans &
marriage loans for Group C and D (reclassified) staff,
one-time financial assistance to families of deceased
staff, etc. The main sources of the above two funds is
a fixed portion of net savings/income of the Institute
from consultancy projects and interest earned on the
Fund. The balance of Development Fund and
Benevolent Fund as on 31 March 2017 was ` 7.67
crore & ` 4.64 crore, respectively.
Building Fund was formed in 1989-90 mainly for
undertaking the infrastructural development of the
Institute from funds earmarked for the same. The
value of the Fund as on 31 March 2017 was ` 22.57
crore.
Provident Fund was established for all PF related
transactions of the staff of the Institute. The balance
of the Fund as on 31 March 2017 was ` 17.25 crore.
Medical Corpus Fund was established to provide
medical benefits to retired employees and their
families. The sources of this fund are subscriptions
from staff/retired staff and interest earned on the
fund. The balance of the fund as on 31 March 2017
was ` 0.86 crore.

Accounts and Audit
The Institute follows the double-entry system on
accrual basis with financial year beginning from 1st of
April and ending with 31st of March every year. The
Annual Accounts of the Institute are audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG). The
Accounts of the Institute are prepared as per the
Uniform Format of Accounts prescribed by
Government of India for Central Autonomous Bodies.
The Audit Report of CAG on the Accounts of the

119

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Institute is incorporated in the Annual Accounts every
year and submitted to the Parliament.
The following audits were conducted during the year
2016-17: (i) The audit of annual accounts for the year
2015-16 was conducted by the Office of the DG (Audit)
Central, Hyderabad during May-June 2016. (ii)
Internal audit for the period 2013-14 to 2015-16 was
conducted by the Internal Audit Wing, O/o Chief

120

Controller of Accounts, Ministry of Rural
Development, Government of India, in October 2016.
(iii) The transaction audit on the accounts for the year
2015-16 was conducted by the Office of the DG (Audit)
Central, Hyderabad during December 2016. The
settlement of the outstanding audit paras is regularly
pursued with the audit office.

Month-wise and Category-wise Distribution of Participants of NIRD&PR Programmes
During the Year 2016-17
Month

1

Govt.
Financial
Officials Institutions

2

3

April

670

5

May

520

June

ZPCs &
PRIs

4

NGOs/
SHGs

Natl./
Univ./
State
Colleges
Instts. for
Res.& Trg.

International

Other
Stakeholders

Total

Women

10

11

No. of Prg.
Conducted

5

6

7

8

9

0

61

4

3

0

33

776

126

18

33

26

58

7

9

2

96

751

138

25

449

16

53

7

7

6

0

32

570

37

16

July

358

272

10

43

22

71

34

111

921

188

18

August

678

44

94

42

2

2

74

52

988

172

31

September

556

0

33

17

46

12

37

70

771

128

29

October

254

0

5

46

208

34

71

12

630

34

24

November

322

19

66

36

63

22

103

25

656

74

26

December

404

0

10

44

91

3

14

0

566

96

18

January

352

0

29

3

0

3

49

25

461

110

15

February

520

0

0

15

26

13

77

12

663

56

25

March

513

0

36

33

16

0

39

17

654

55

21

Total

5596

389

362

405

492

178

500

485

8407

1214

266

7254

4389

129

4007

17401

3760

580

7426

10971

5189

366

622

622

167

34

12540

44655

14719

1375

a) Hyderabad

Networking
NRLM

7254

MGNREGA

11392

DDU-GKY

534

2002
9

103

2559

325

15

RTP

121

Total

17522

398

465

4966

8071

193

500

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - I

122

ANNEXURE - I (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

April

26

0

31

1

21

0

0

27

106

106

4

May

101

25

0

4

53

6

0

23

212

59

9

June

119

0

14

0

79

1

0

0

213

45

5

July

128

0

10

27

125

17

0

39

346

117

9

August

103

12

6

1

105

0

0

28

255

64

8

September

61

0

8

0

126

0

0

28

223

93

7

October

134

22

44

0

179

0

0

26

405

108

10

November

55

0

12

52

50

0

0

29

198

92

6

December

133

2

0

0

13

0

0

20

168

39

6

January

82

0

10

0

182

3

0

6

283

68

9

February

66

0

3

0

205

0

0

31

305

74

7

March

69

1

13

9

151

40

0

31

314

85

8

Total

1077

62

151

94

1289

67

0

288

3028

950

88

Grand Total (a+b)

18599

460

616

5060

9360

260

500

12828

47683

15669

1463

Participation
in percentage

39.01

0.96

1.29

10.61

19.63

0.55

1.05

26.90

100.00

32.86

b) NERC

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Overall effectiveness in percentage

7

Female

6

16

17

18

27

5

94

30

3

5

27

4

28

58

3

8

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

1

CAS161701

Training
(LRDI)

Land Rights and Legal
Empowerment of Grassroot Stakeholders

18-20
Apr

K Suman Chandra
E V Prakash Rao

NIRD&PR

2

CFL161701

ToT

Monitoring and Evaluation of Livelihoods Projects

18-23
Apr

G V K Lohi Das
S Chatterjee

NIRD&PR

30

3

CFL161702

ToT

Participatory Tools and Techniques for Professionals

18-23
Apr

P Raj Kumar
P SivaRam

NIRD&PR

17

4

CWE161701

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

18-27
Apr

G Rajani Kanth
and team

NIRD&PR

30

5

CAS161702

Training
(LRDI)

Land Rights and Legal Empowerment of
Grassroot Stakeholders

25-27
Apr

K Suman Chandra
E V Prakash Rao

NIRD&PR

6

CGARD161701

Training

Geo-Informatics and Modern Survey Techniques
for Planning & Management of PMGSY

25-30
Apr

P Kesava Rao
H K Solanki

NIRD&PR

27

7

CGGPA161701

Workshop

Designing Curriculum on Social Accountability
Tools for Good Governance

27-28
Apr

M Sarumathy
K Prabhakar

NIRD&PR

2

Others (PSUs / Individuals)

5

International

Venue

Univ. / Colleges

4

Faculty

Natl. / State Instts for Res. & Trg

3

Duration

Vol. Orgns/ NGOs

2

Title of the Programme

ZP & PRIs

1

Type

Bankers & Comm Orgns.

Code

Govt. Officials

S.
No.

Total

Details of Programme-wise Participation and Feedback During : 2016-17

27

4

1

28

2

4

2

80

28

86

27

88

10

123
(Contd...)

4

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II

124

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

OFF CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
8

CPR161701

Regional

Process and Methodology for Developing Gram
Panchayat Development Plan

P C Sikligar

MGSIRD
Jabalpur
MP

25

25

9

CRI

Workshop

Integrated Cluster Action Plans Preparation (ICAP)
at Karnataka for Southern Region (RURBAN)

6-Apr

P SivaRam
and Team

Bangaluru

76

76

18

10

CRI

Workshop

Integrated Cluster Action Plans Preparation (ICAP)
at New Delhi for Northeast Region (RURBAN)

11-Apr

P SivaRam
and Team

New Delhi

92

92

17

11

CRI

Workshop

Integrated Cluster Action Plans Preparation (ICAP)
at Jharkhand for Eastern Region (RURBAN)

13Apr

P SivaRam
and Team

Ranchi

89

89

25

12

SNR161701

Regional

Planning for Sustainable Livelihoods

11-15
Apr

S N Rao

SIRD
Agartala
Tripura

25

25

13

CGSD161701

Regional

Gender Budgeting

25-28
Apr

N V Madhuri

SIRD
Ahmedabad
Gujarat

34

34

17

88

14

CGARD161702

Regional
(MoA&FW)

Preparation of District Irrigation Plan (DIP)
under PMKSY

25-29
Apr

T P Kumar
V Madhava Rao

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

34

34

5

80

15

CPME161701

Regional

Planning and Management of Micro-Enterprises
for SHGs

25-29
Apr

Shankar Chatterjee

DDU-SIRD
Lucknow
Uttar
Pradesh

25

30

5

86

16

CRI

Workshop

Integrated Cluster Action Plans Preparation (ICAP)
at Maharashtra for Western Region (RURBAN)

26Apr

P SivaRam
and Team

Mumbai

89

89

20

17

CRTCN

Training

Study Tour of Rajasthan Rural Development
Officials

30 Apr3 May

R P Achari

NIRD&PR

50

50

18

CDP161701

Regional
Workshop

Gram Panchayat Development Plan for
Decentralised Rural Development

28-29
Apr

Y Bhaskar Rao
R Chinnadurai

SIRD
Ranchi
Jharkhand

25

25

Total

670

5

5

0

61

4

3

0

33

776

126

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

4-8
Apr

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

11

21

16

67

18

17

4

84

29

5

84

50

3

84

MAY 2016
1

CWE161702

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

2-11
May

G Rajani Kanth
and team

NIRD&PR

10

2

CFIE161702

Training
(NFDB)

Credit Flow to the Fisheries Sector

4-5
May

VRM Rao
RK Rao

NIRD&PR

7

3

CFL161703

ToT

Accelerating Farm-based Livelihoods

2-6
May

G V K Lohi Das
S Venkatadri

NIRD&PR

17

4

CAS161703

Training
(LRDI)

Land Rights and Legal Empowerment of
Grassroot Stakeholders

9-11
May

K Suman Chandra
E V Prakash Rao

NIRD&PR

5

CICT161701

Training

ICT Applications for Management of Rural
Development Programmes

9-13
May

G V Satya Narayana
& Team

NIRD&PR

37

6

CRTCN

Workshop

Transforming India: Role of NIRD&PR

14-15
May

P Durgaprasad
R P Achari

NIRD&PR

25

7

CWE161703

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

16-25
May

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

11

22

33

8

CWE161704

Workshop

Panchayati Raj Institutions and MGNREGS

18-20
May

G Rajani Kanth
H Kurmarao

NIRD&PR

6

4

10

9

CRTCN

International Mozambique Delegation

22-26
May

R P Achari
Raj Kumar

NIRD&PR

10

ADDLCWE1617

Training

Poverty and Inequality Estimation

23 - 27
May

G Rajani Kanth
S V Rangacharyulu

NIRD&PR

47

47

23

70

11

CFL161704

ToT(CRIDA)

Management of Natural Resources for
Sustainable Rural Livelihoods

23-28
May

U H Kumar
P SivaRam

NIRD&PR

23

23

7

84

12

CHRD

Consultation NIRD&PR-UNICEF : Social Norms Enabled
Transformation

12-13
May

Gyanmudra

NIRD&PR

30

30

13

CHRD161701

Workshop

Effective Proposal Writing

26-27
May

Gyanmudra
Lakhan Singh

NIRD&PR

33

33

7

14

CWE

Workshop

Social Audit Workshop to Develop
Technical Manual

27-29
May

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

3

16

19

3

15

CWE161705

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

30 May
- 8 Jun

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

16

21

37

31

5

3

5

29
5

1

4

3

25

2

1

2

125
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

126

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

7

76

36

19

87

4

88

OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
16

CDC161701

Regional

Application of Web Technologies for
Information Dissemination

2-6
May

T Rama Devi

SIRD
Karfectar
Sikkim

25

17

CPR

Regional

Planning for Sustainable Livelihoods

2-6
May

S N Rao

SIRD
Tripura

24

18

CPR161703

Regional ToT Gram Panchayat Based Integrated
District Planning

9-13
May

RSN Reddy

IMPA&RD
Jammu J&K

25

19

CSRPPPPA161701

Regional

Public-Private Partnership for Entrepreneurship
Development

9-13
May

R Murugesan

SIRD
Karfectar
Sikkim

11

20

CGARD161704

Regional
(MoA&FW)

Preparation of PMKSY District Irrigation Plan

10-14
May

P Kesava Rao
T Phanindra Kumar

YASHADA
Pune
Maharashtra

14

14

21

CGARD161706

Regional

Geospatial Technologies for Monitoring of
IWMP Projects

16-20
May

HK Solanki
P Kesava Rao

DDU-SIRD
Lucknow
Uttar
Pradesh

29

29

22

CGARD161705

Regional

Geospatial Technology Applications for Planning
and Management of PMKSY

DSR Murhty
T Phanindra Kumar

SIRD
Jharkhand
Ranchi

33

33

6

90

23

CGSD161703

Regional

Development of SHG based Sustainable
Rural Livelihoods

23 -26
May

N V Madhuri

SIRD
Ahmedabad
Gujarat

18

32

26

84

24

CAS161704

Regional

Participatory Management of Rural
Development Programmes

23-27
May

K Suman Chandra
E V Prakash Rao

SIRD
Kolasib
Mizoram

42

25

CGARD161701

Regional

Preparation of District Irrigation
Plan under PMKSY

30 May
- 3 June

T Phanindra Kumar
K Haloi

Guwahati

34

34

5

80

751

138

520

2

26
25

2

7

9

1

6

14

12

33

26

58

86

54

7

9

2

96

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Total

16-20 May

25

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

JUNE 2016
1

CRTCN161701

Colloquium

National Colloquium of ETCs

2-3
Jun

R P Achari
P Durgaprasad
V K Reddy

NIRD&PR

68

68

2

CWE

Workshop

Decennial Performance Assesment of MGNREGS

2-3
Jun

G Rajani Kanth
H Kurmarao

NIRD&PR

10

10

3

CRI161702

Training

Solid and Liquid Waste Management

R Ramesh
P SivaRam

NIRD&PR

25

4

CPME

Training
cum
Workshop

Trg cum Workshop for Sr. Officers, HoDs and
others of UTs Nominated by the MoRD,
Govt. of India

7Jun

Shankar Chatterjee

NIRD&PR

7

5

CPME161704

Training

Participatory Rural Appraisal Methods and
Techniques for District Planning

6–10
Jun

R A Jayamani
R Chinnadurai

NIRD&PR

45

6

CSA161701

Training

Social Audit in IAY

15-17
Jun

C Dheeraja
Y Gangireddy

NIRD&PR

33

7

CDP161702

Training

Financial Management in PRIs

13-17
Jun

Y Bhaskar Rao

NIRD&PR

25

8

OL161701

Workshop

Sarkaari Kamkaj Mein Rajbasha Hindi

Anita Pandey

NIRD&PR

9

CGARD161707

Training

Geoinformatics and Modern Survey Techniques
for Planning & Management of PMGSY

15Jun
20-24
Jun

T Phanindra Kumar
DSR Murthy

NIRD&PR

32

32

10

CAS

Training

Capacity Building Programme for
Intelligence Officers

20-24
Jun

K Suman Chandra

NIRD&PR

47

47

11

CAS

Training

Capacity Building Programme for
Intelligence Officers

27 Jun
- 1 Jul

K Suman Chandra

NIRD&PR

48

48

12

CDP161703

Training

Participatory Planning for Poverty Reduction
and Sustainable Development

20-24
Jun

R Chinnadurai
R Aruna Jayamani

NIRD&PR

29

6-10 Jun

3

28

2

78

61

5

82

34

9

80

1

90

3

74

7

12

4
1

25
24

2

1

24

32

127
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

128

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

BRASIPRD6
Kalyani
West Bengal

16

9

10

11

12

1

3

6

13

14 15

16

17

8

88

18

OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
13

CPME161705

Regional

Planning and Management of MicroEnterprises for SHGs

20-24
Jun

Shankar Chatterjee

14

CPR

Regional

Gram Panchayat Development Plan :
The Process and the Methodology

13-17
Jun

P C Sikligar

MGSIRD
Jabalpur
MP

15

CPR

Training

Integration of Rural Development Programmes
in GPDP

27 Jun
- 1 Jul

Pratyusna Patnaik

SIRD26
Imphal
Manipur

16

CCCDM161703

Regional

Disaster Mitigation Strategies

Total

27 Jun - 1Jul

EV Prakash Rao
V Suresh Babu

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamil Nadu

4

36

36

3

1

36

4

34

48

449

9

82

88

48

16

53

7

7

6

0

32

570

89

37

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

11-14
Jul

Sucharita Pujari

NIRD&PR

40

4Jul

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

32

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

20

9

10

11

12

13

7

1

14 15

16

17

48

48

32

4

18

JULY 2016
1

CGSD161705

Training

Gender Sensitisation and Prevention of
Sexual Harassment at Workplace

2

CWE

Workshop

Orientation Workshop on BFT Programme

3

CWE

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

4-14
Jul

4

CFIE

International Rural Credit for Poverty Reduction
ITEC/SCAAP

11 Jul
- 7 Aug

BK Swain
VRM Rao

NIRD&PR

12

12

5

CCCDM

International Community based Disaster Management :
ITEC/SCAAP Mainstreaming Risk Reduction Strategies

11 Jul
- 7 Aug

EV Prakash Rao
V Suresh Babu

NIRD&PR

22

22

6

CWE

Workshop

Social Audit Capacity-building Plan

12-Jul

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

48

7

CGGPA

Seminar

Equity, Access and Inclusion- Transforming Rural
India through Financial Inclusion

18Jul

M Sarumathy
K Prabhakar

NIRD&PR

50

8

CFIE

Training

Investment Credit in Agriculture Sector

18-22
Jul

RK Rao
VRM Rao

NIRD&PR

9

CGGPA

Training

Above Board: Enhancing Governance for
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)

19-23
Jul

M Sarumathy
K Prabhakar

NIRD&PR

10

CRI161703

Training

Behaviour Change Communication for SBM

22

CSRPPPPA161702

Training

Corporate Social Responsibility in Sustainable
Rural Livelihoods

R Ramesh
P SivaRam
R Murugesan

NIRD&PR

11

18-22
Jul
18 – 22
Jul

NIRD&PR

1

12

CWE

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

18-28
Jul

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

25

13

CICT161702

Training

ICT Applications and e-Governance

25-29
Jul

G V Satya Narayana
& Team

NIRD&PR

24

14

CFIE

Training

Induction Training for AFOs of Dena Bank

25 Jul
- 6 Aug

RK Rao
VRM Rao

NIRD&PR

15

CFL161706

ToT

Skill Development for Rural Youth

25-30
Jul

Raj Kumar Pammi
U H Kumar

NIRD&PR

50

70
4

78
92

48

9

300

80

24

24

4

84

10

10

1

68

22

3

82

13

39

4

84

48

73
40

4

82

31

6

86

65

10

83

200

50

5

10

1

19

6

31
56

80

8

1

129
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

130

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

24

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

24

2

94

38

7

80

23

2

84

921

188

OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
16

CGARD161708

Regional

Geospatial Technology Applications for
Planning & Management of PMKSY

11-16
Jul

P Kesava Rao
S Siddayya

SIRD
Ahmedabad
Gujarat

17

CHRD161702

Regional

Training Management

18-22
Jul

Lakhan Singh
Gyanmudra

SIRD
Bhubaneswar
Odisha

18

CPME161703

Regional

Planning, Implementation, Monitoring and
Evaluation of Rural Development Projects

25-29
Jul

Shankar Chatterjee
SV Rangacharyulu

Total

ANS-SIRD
Mysuru
Karnataka

38

16

358

7

272 10

43

22

71

34

111

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

42

5

82

42

14

86

30

3

82

41

25

AUGUST 2016
1

CPME161706

Training

Participatory Rural Appraisal Methods and
Techniques for District Planning

1- 5
Aug

R A Jayamani
R Chinnadurai

NIRD&PR

31

11

2

CFL161707

ToT
(NIMSME)

Strategies for Development of Rural Livelihoods

1-5
Aug

U H Kumar
N V Madhuri

NIRD&PR

42

3

CDP161705

Training

GPDP and Convergence of Rural
Development Programmes

1-5
Aug

Y Bhaskar Rao
Pratyusna Patnaik

NIRD&PR

23

4

CGSD

Workshop

Workshop on Development Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture Curriculam

3-4
Aug

N V Madhuri
C S Singhal

NIRD&PR

11

5

CGGPA

Training

Above Board: Enhancing Governance for
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)

7-10
Aug

M Sarumathy
K Prabhakar

NIRD&PR

6

CGSD

International Empowerment of Women for Rural Development
ITEC/SCAAP

8 Aug
- 4 Sep

C S Singhal
N V Madhuri
Sucharita Pujari

NIRD&PR

8

CESD161702

Training

Rural Development Programmes for
Sustainable Development in Rural Areas

8-12
Aug

G Valentina

NIRD&PR

7

CFIE

Training

Induction Training for AFOs of Dena Bank

8 - 20
Aug

RK Rao
VRM Rao

NIRD&PR

8

CWE

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

17-27
Aug

G Rajani Kanth
and team

NIRD&PR

15

10

CPME

Training

Convergence of Plan Programmes for
Govt. of Odisha Officials

17-19
Aug

Shankar Chatterjee

NIRD&PR

25

11

CPME

Training

PIME RD Projects

29 Aug
- 2 Sep

Shankar Chatterjee

NIRD&PR

25

12

CPME161707

Training

Evaluation of Rural Development Programmes

8-12
Aug

G V Raju

NIRD&PR

13

13

CSA161704

Training

Social Audit in IAY

17-19
Aug

C Dheeraja
Y Gangireddy

NIRD&PR

19

14

CHRD

Seminar

Health Psychology : Contribution to
Health and Well-being

4-6
Aug

Gyanmudra

UoH
Hyderabad

70

70

15

CHRD

Consultative
Meeting

Management Development Programme on
Development Leadership

19Aug

Gyanmudra

NIRD&PR

17

17

16

OL161702

Seminar

Samakalin Bhartiya Sandarbh aur Hindi

22
Aug

Anita Pandey

NIRD&PR

39

39

7
28

2

11

11
27

20

27

10

22

30

33
29

2

2

86

2

82

97

33

6

86

44

8

25

8

27

5

82

13

3

77

23

5

88

2

131
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

132

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

17

CCCDM161704

Training

18

CSR

19

4

6

7

22-26
Aug

V Suresh Babu
EV Prakash Rao

NIRD&PR

International Management of Rural Financing Institutions and
CICTAB
Cooperatives for Rural Development

22-26
Aug

R Murugesan

NIRD&PR

CGARD161710

Training

22-27
Aug

P Kesava Rao
HK Solanki

NIRD&PR

20

CWE

International Participatory Rural Development
ITEC/SCAAP

Aug 8
- Sep 4

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

21

CWE161709

Training

29 Aug
- 2 Sep

P Anuradha
G Rajani Kanth

NIRD&PR

24

22

CRTCN161703

Regional ToT Induction Programme on Training
Methods and Skills

29 Aug
- 3 Sep

R P Achari
V K Reddy

NIRD&PR

22

22

23

CAS

Workshop

30-31
Aug

Ch Radhika Rani

NIRD&PR

37

37

Climate Resilient Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods

Geoinformatics and Modern Survey Techniques for
Planning and Management of PMGSY

Enhancing Women Participation in MGNREGS

Farmer Producer Organisations: The Journey
so far and Road Ahead

5

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

30
34
45
13

16

17

18

30

7

86

34

7

82

45

3

88

9

86

13
1

25

85

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Bhopal
MP

22
2

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

16

38

17

18

8

84

OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
24

CWE

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

3-13
Aug

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

25

CDP161704

Regional

Participatory Planning under GPDP Framework

8-12
Aug

R Chinnadurai
R Aruna Jayamani

SIRD Ranchi
Jharkhand

26

CPR

Regional

Gram Panchayat Development Plan

6-10
Aug

P C Sikligar

SIRD
Ahmedabad
Gujarat

27

CHRD161704

Regional ToT Community Participation for Universalisation of
Elementary Education

8-12
Aug

T Vijaya Kumar
Lakhan Singh

BRASIPRD
Kalyani
West Bengal

25

28

CGARD161711

Regional

Geospatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of PMKSY

8-12
Aug

T Phanindra Kumar
D S R Murthy

Kottarakara
Kerala

29

CFL161709

Regional
ToT (CRIDA)

Management of Natural Resources for
Sustainable Rural Livelihoods

22-27
Aug

U H Kumar
Ch Radhika Rani

30

CDC161702

Regional ToT Web based Design and Development of
Products and Services

25-26
Aug

T Rama Devi

31

CGARD161709

Regional

Total

GIS based Gram Panchayat Planning

22-26Aug

DSR Murthy
T Phanindra Kumar

30

32

41

41

34

6

84

33

33

11

90

TPIP&RD
Raipur
Chhattisgarh

35

35

7

SIRD
Ahmedabad
Gujarat

26

28

2

APSIRD
Bapatla
Andhra Pradesh

27

27

6

988

172

678

5

4

84

2

44

94

42

2

2

74

52

90

133
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

134

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

SEPTEMBER 2016
1

CRI

International Planning and Management of Drinking
ITEC/SCAAP Water and Sanitation

5 Sep
- 3 Oct

P SivaRam

NIRD&PR

14

14

2

CGGPA

International Good Governance for Management of Rural
ITEC/SCAAP Development Programmes

5 Sep
- 2 Oct

Sarumathy
K Prabhakar

NIRD&PR

23

23

11

90

5

CGSD161707

Training

Development of SHG based Livelihoods for
Rural Women

19-23
Sep

N V Madhuri

NIRD&PR

25

31

12

86

6

CPME

Training

Convergence of Plan Programmes for
Govt. of Odisha Officials

19-21
Sep

Shankar Chatterjee

NIRD&PR

24

24

6

7

CPME161708

Training

Participatory Planning in MGNREGS

19-23
Sep

R A Jayamani
R Chinnadurai

NIRD&PR

53

53

5

9

CWE

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

5-15
Sep

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

Lucknow
UP

34

70

2

10

CWE

ToT

Social Audit and Social Accountability

6-14
Sep

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

36

36

7

11

CWE

ToT

Social Audit and Social Accountability

7-15
Sep

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

31

31

9

12

CWE

ToT

Social Audit and Social Accountability

8-16
Sep

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

54

54

4

13

CWE

Training

Convergence of MGNREGS Works for
Strengthening Rural Livelihoods

19-23
Sep

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

11

28

4

14

CESD161706

Training

Social Security for Unorganised Workers

26-30
Sep

Srivastava
R R Prasad

NIRD&PR

15

CWE

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

26-30
Sep

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

15

16

CHRD161703

ToT

Human Resource Planning and Development

26-30
Sep

T Vijaya Kumar
Lakhan Singh

NIRD&PR

18

6

36

17
12

85

12

86
62

10

25

7

4

26

10

86

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

4

84

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

34

4

90

23

10

33

7

OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
17

CGARD161712

Regional

Geospatial Technologies for Planning and
Mangement of PMKSY

18

CFL161710

Regional
(NIMSME)

Strategies for Development of Rural Livelihoods

19

CNRM161702

Regional

20

CCCDM161705

21

DSR Murthy
T Phanindra Kumar

SIRD
MM NAGAR
Tamil Nadu

34

12-16
Sep

U H Kumar
N V Madhuri

SIRD
Ranchi
Jharkhand

22

1

Water Use Efficiency and Equity for Participatory
Irrigation Management

19-23
Sep

Siddayya
Suman Chandra

SIRD
Ahmedabad
Gujarat

28

3

Regional

Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction Strategies

19-23
Sep

EV Prakash Rao
V Suresh Babu

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

24

24

CPME161710

Regional

Results Based Management of Rural
Development Programmes

19-23
Sep

G V Raju

SIRD
Bhubaneswar
Odisha

15

15

22

CPR161710

Regional

Gram Panchayat Based Planning and
Management of Rural Development Programmes

19-23
Sep

P C Sikligar

SIRD
Ranchi
Jharkhand

23

CSA161705

Regional ToT Social Audit in Rural Development Programmes

19-23
Sep

C Dheeraja

SIRD
Imphal
Manipur

47

47

8

88

24

CGARD161713

Regional

19-23
Sep

HK Solanki
P Kesava Rao

SIRD
Ranchi
Jharkhand

23

23

1

88

25

CHRD161706

Regional ToT Community Participation for Universalisation
of Elementary Education

5-9
Sep

T Vijaya kumar

BRASIPRD
Kalyani
West Bengal

16

24

11

82

26

CAS

Regional

K Suman Chandra

ETC
Taliparmba
Kerala

Geospatial Technology Applications for
Planning and Management of PMKSY

Sustainable Development : Environmentfriendly Strategies

6-9
Sep

22-24
Sep

2

28

5

86

4

28

1

2

28

90

88

82

28

135
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

136

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7
ETC
Taliparmba
Kerala

8

27

CAS

Regional

Sustainable Development : Environmentfriendly Strategies

28-30
Sep

K Suman Chandra

28

CFL161711

Regional

Monitoring and Evaluation of Rural Livelihoods

26-30
Sep

G V K Lohi Das
U H Kumar

SIRD
Karfectar
Sikkim

29

29

CRTCN161705

Training
(IRMA)

How to be a Good Trainer

R P Achari
and Team

IRMA
Anand
Gujarat

17

Total

5-9
Sep

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

18

556

16

17

18

6

90

18

1

30

17

0

33

17

46

12

37

70

771

128

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

23

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

2

30

4

88

16

16

OCTOBER 2016
1

CICT161703

Training

Information Technology and Project Management

3-7
Oct

G V Satya Narayana
& Team

NIRD&PR

5

2

CRTCN

Writeshop

State Training Policy and Action Plan

3-4
Oct

R P Achari
V K Reddy

NIRD&PR

3

CNRM

International Natural Resource Management for
ITEC/SCAAP Sustainable Rural Livelihoods

3-30
Oct

Siddayya
K Prabhakar
K Suman Chandra

NIRD&PR

13

13

7

88

4

CIAT

International Planning and Management of Rural
ITEC/SCAAP Housing and Habitat Projects

3-30
Oct

Y Gangi Reddy
P SivaRam
R Ramesh

NIRD&PR

10

10

2

88

5

CAS

Seminar

Land Rights and Changing Agrarian Relations

14-15
Oct

K Suman Chandra
EV Prakash Rao
Ch Radhika Rani

NIRD&PR

41

6

CHRD

Training

Model Induction Programme on Research
Methodology for SIRDs and ETCs

17-21
Oct

Gyanmudra
P Satish Chandra

NIRD&PR

10

7

CDP161707

Training

Project Planning and Management of NGOs

17-21
Oct

R Chinnadurai
R Aruna Jayamani

NIRD&PR

8

CAS

ToT

ToT Programme on Agricultural Technology
Assistants (ATA), Syngenta Foundation India (SFI)

17-22
Oct

K Suman Chandra
Ch Radhika Rani

NIRD&PR

13

9

CWE

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

17-27
Oct

G Rajani Kanth

NIRD&PR

18

10

CHRD161707

Seminar

Strategies for Inclusion of Focused Group
Children in School Education

20-21
Oct

T Vijaya Kumar
Lakhan Singh

NIRD&PR

11

CSA161706

Training

Social Audit in IWMP

20-22
Oct

C Dheeraja
K Prabhakar

NIRD&PR

12

CPME

International Planning and Management of Rural
ITEC/SCAAP Development Programmes

31 Oct
- 27 Nov

S Chatterjee
R A Jayamani
R Chinnadurai

NIRD&PR

13

CAS

International Sustainable Agricultural Strategies for
ITEC/SCAAP
Rural Development

31 Oct
- 27 Nov

K Suman Chandra
EV Prakash Rao

NIRD&PR

41

4
28

2

1

30

2

86

13
12
25

8

14

30

1

25

18

26

5

84

22

22

7

90

26

26

88

137
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

138

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
CESD

Training

Planning and Management of Social
Security Programmes

3-7
Oct

G Valentina

SIRD
Punjab

45

45

15

CPR

Regional

Planning for Sustainable Livelihoods

4-8
Oct

S N Rao

SIRD
Tripura

22

22

16

CAS

Regional

Sustainable Development : Environmentfriendly Strategies

4-6
Oct

K Suman Chandra

ETC
Taliparmba
Kerala

49

49

17

CAS

Regional

Sustainable Development : Environmentfriendly Strategies

14-16
Oct

K Suman Chandra

ETC
Taliparmba
Kerala

31

31

18

CAS

Regional

Sustainable Development : Environmentfriendly Strategies

19-21
Oct

K Suman Chandra

ETC
Taliparmba
Kerala

11

11

19

CRTCN

Writeshop

State Training Policy and Action Plan

20-21
Oct

R P Achari
V K Reddy

DDU SIRD
Lucknow
Uttar
Pradesh

20

20

20

CAS

Regional

Sustainable Development : Environmentfriendly Strategies

20-22
Oct

K Suman Chandra

ETC
Taliparmba
Kerala

14

14

21

CAS

Regional

Sustainable Development : Environmentfriendly Strategies

26-28
Oct

K Suman Chandra

ETC
Taliparmba
Kerala

25

25

22

CAS

Regional

Sustainable Development : Environmentfriendly Strategies

31 Oct
- 2 Nov

K Suman Chandra

ETC
Taliparmba
Kerala

38

38

23

CGARD161714

Regional

Geo-informatics Applications for
Planning and Management of PMKSY

17-22
Oct

P Kesava Rao
HK Solanki

TPIP&RD
Raipur
Chhattisgarh

44

24

CCCDM161707

Regional

Realtime Strategies for Drought
Mitigation in Rainfed Areas

24-28
Oct

V Suresh Babu
EV Prakash Rao

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamil Nadu

30

Total

254

5

49

98

5

30

0

5

46

208

34

71

12

630

90

84

34

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

14

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

19

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

23

1

80

NOVEMBER 2016
1

CSA161707

Training

2

CAS

3

Social Audit in 14th FC Grant

1-3
Nov

C Dheeraja
K Jayalakshmi

NIRD&PR

International Productivity Tools and Techniques for Improving
APO-CIRDAP the Productivity of Micro and Small Agro Food
Processing Business

7-11
Nov

Ch Radhika Rani

NIRD&PR

CAS

ToT

ToT Programme on Agricultural Technology
Assistants (ATA), Syngenta Foundation India (SFI)

2-5
Nov

Ch Radhika Rani

NIRD&PR

23

4

CNRM

National
Seminar

Livestock based Livelihoods for Rural Transformation
- Special Focus on Cow based Livelihood Interventions

3-4
Nov

Siddayya

NIRD&PR

6

5

CHRD

Workshop

Unnat Bharat Abhiyan

4-Nov

Gyanmudra

NIRD&PR

24

6

RSETI161704

Workshop

Best Practices in RSETIs

4-5
Nov

O N Bansal
and Team

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

4

OL161703

Workshop

Rajbhasha ki Avashyakatha

7Nov

Anita Pandey

NIRD&PR

10

7

CNRM161703

ToT

Management of Watershed Projects in
Rainfed and Hilly Areas

7-11
Nov

Siddayya

NIRD&PR

10

8

CESD161704

Training

Community based Rehabilitation of Persons
with Disabilities

7-11
Nov

G Valentina

NIRD&PR

10

9

SRSC161701

Seminar

Challenges of Livelihoods and Economic
Diversification in Rural India

17-18
Nov

Kailash Sarap

NIRD&PR

30

10

CSA1617

International Social Audit in Rural Development Programmes
CIRDAP

9-18
Nov

C Dheeraja
K Jayalakshmi
Pratyusna Patnaik

NIRD&PR

13

13

6

11

CGARD

International Geoinformatics Applications in
ITEC/SCAAP Rural Development

28 Nov
- 8 Jan

V Madhava Rao
P Kesava Rao
DSR Murthy

NIRD&PR

21

21

6

12

CESD

International Community Driven Rural Development
ITEC/SCAAP

28 Nov
- 8 Jan

G Valentina

NIRD&PR

25

25

13

CSRPPPPA

International Corporate Social Responsibility in
ITEC/SCAAP Community Development

28 Nov
- 24 Dec

R Murugesan
R P Achari

NIRD&PR

22

22

11

14

CHRD

Training

30 Nov
- 2 Dec

Gyanmudra

NIRD&PR

20

9

Tools and Techniques for Monitoring, Evaluation,
Measurement and Survey Design by J-PAL

4
22

1

2

4

4

10

7

80

23

78

34

8

24
18

20

22

18

10
9

2

4

25

18

3

28

89
78

30
88

98
84

139
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

140

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

18

5

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

11

78

5

80

OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
15

CPME161711

Regional

Monitoring and Evaluation of Rural
Development Programmes

7-11
Nov

K P Kumaran

16

CAS

Regional

Sustainable Development : Environmentfriendly Strategies

2-4
Nov

K Suman Chandra

17

CAS

Regional

Sustainable Development : Environmentfriendly Strategies

29 Nov
- 1 Dec

K Suman Chandra

18

CGARD161715

Regional
ToT

GIS Based Gram Panchayat Planning

7-11
Nov

HK Solanki
P Kesava Rao

SIRD
Nongsder
Meghalaya

28

28

19

CGSD

Regional

Startegies for Empowerment of Rural Women

7-11
Nov

C S Singhal

HIRD
Nilokheri
Haryana

31

31

84

20

CPR161713

Regional

Gram Panchayat Based Planning and Management
of Rural Development Programmes

15-19
Nov

P C Sikligar

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

37

92

21

CGSD161711

Regional
Workshop

Gender Budgeting in Rural Development

16-18
Nov

C S Singhal

BRASIPRD
Kalyani
West Bengal

20

22

CWE

ToT

Barefoot Technicians

16-26
Nov

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

Bhopal
MP

16

23

CGARD161717

Regional

ICT Tools for Database Applications in
Rural Development

21-25
Nov

K Rajeshwar

IMPA&RD
Jammu
J&K

24

CPME161712

Regional

Results based Management of Rural
Development Programmes

21-25
Nov

G V Raju

SIRD
Bhubaneswar
Odisha

25

CRTCN

Writeshop

State Training Policy and Action Plan

28-29
Nov

R P Achari
V K Reddy

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

26

CFL161714

Regional
ToT

Skill Development for Rural Youth

21-26
Nov

Raj Kumar Pammi
G V K Lohi Das

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

14

ETC
Taliparmba
Kerala
ETC
Taliparmba
Kerala

8

45

12

12

28

28

37

20

18

34

3

30

30

4

85

13

13

6

80

21

1

94

656

74

19

18

322

19

3

19

66

36

63

22

103

25

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Total

MGSIRD
Jabalpur
MP

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

17

5

21

4

18

DECEMBER 2016
1

CPR

Training

Best Practices in Local Governance

5-7
Dec

Pratyusna Patnaik

NIRD&PR

17

2

CGGPA161704

Training

E-Governance Strategies for Improved
Service Delivery

5-9
Dec

K Prabhakar
M Sarumathy

NIRD&PR

13

3

CGSD

Training

Convergence of Rural Development Programmes
in Mission Poorna Shakti

5-9
Dec

Sucharita Pujari

NIRD&PR

15

4

CICT161704

Training

ICT Applications for Management of
Rural Development Programmes

12-16
Dec

G V Satya Narayana
& Team

NIRD&PR

12

5

CCCDM

International Smart Agriculture
CIRDAP

12-20
Dec

V Suresh Babu
Siddayya
EV Prakash Rao

NIRD&PR

6

CSA161708

Training

Social Audit in ICDS

14-16
Dec

C Dheeraja
N V Madhuri

NIRD&PR

8

7

CWE

ToT

Enabling Digital Payments in Rural India

14-15Dec

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

8

CPR

Regional

1st Conclave of Partnering Institutions for PRIs

28-Dec

S N Rao
Pratyusna Patnaik

9

CWE

ToT

Enabling Digital Payments in Rural India
and Team

21-22
Dec

10

CPR

Conclave

Strengthening of PRIs through Continous
Capacity Building

28-Dec

5

3

15
5

2

19
14

5

88
5

14

86
89

13

13

40

40

4

NIRD&PR

67

67

G Rajani Kanth

NIRD&PR

69

69

S N Rao
Pratyusna Patnaik

NIRD&PR

66

86

12

66

141
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

142

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

6

92

18

OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
11

CNRM161704

Regional
ToT(IIWM)

Water Resources Management for
Sustainable Development

5-9
Dec

Siddayya

12

CFL161713

Regional

Participatory Tools and Techniques for
Planning and Management of Livelihoods

5-9
Dec

G V K Lohi Das
P SivaRam

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

26

26

13

CWE

ToT

Enabling Digital Payments in Rural India

21-22
Dec

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

49

49

14

CRTCN

Writeshop

State Training Policy and Action Plan

8-9
Dec

R P Achari
V K Reddy

MGSIRD
Jabalpur
MP

16

CPME161713

Regional ToT Participatory Rural Appraisal Methods
and Techniques

5-9
Dec

R A Jayamani
R Chinnadurai

GRU
Gandhigram
Tamil Nadu

34

34

10

88

17

CPME161714

Regional

5-9
Dec

K P Kumaran

SIRD
Kottarakara
Kalyani
West Bengal

29

29

11

82

39

15

88

566

96

Monitoring and Evaluation of Rural
Development Programmes

V K Reddy
19

Total

CDP161708

Regional

Project Planning and Management of NGOs

26-30
Dec

R Chinnadurai
R Aruna Jayamani

SIRD25
Bhubaneswar
Odisha

25

12

SIRD
Tamil Nadu

12

39

404

0

10

44

91

11

3

14

0

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

JANUARY 2016
1

CGSD

Workshop

Gender Budgeting in Rural Development

4-6
Jan

N V Madhuri

NIRD&PR

2

CPR

Regional

Gram Panchayat Development Plan

9-13
Jan

P C Sikligar

HIPA
Shimla

3

CHRD

Workshop

Unnat Bharat Abhiyan

4-6
Jan

Gyanmudra

NIRD&PR

4

CHRD

International Training Methodology for Development
ITEC/SCAAP Professionals

16 Jan
- 12 Feb

Gyanmudra
T Vijaya Kumar
Lakhan Singh

NIRD&PR

5

CWE

International Management of Rural Employment Projects
ITEC/SCAAP and Poverty Alleviation

16 Jan
- 12 Feb

G Rajani Kanth
P Anuradha

NIRD&PR

6

CWE

ToT

Enabling Digital Payments in Rural India

17-18
Jan

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

7

CGARD

Training

Training on Training Management Portal
for NIRD&PR faculty and Staff

9-20
Jan

K Rajeshwar

8

CDP161709

Training

Results Based Management: Performance
Indicators, Monitoring and Evaluation

23-27
Jan

9

CSA161710

Training

Social Audit in 14th FC Grant

10

CWE

ToT

11

CRI

12

CGSD

29

29
27

35

20

NA

27
1

2

38

3

25

25

7

24

24

9

12

12

2

NIRD&PR

75

75

20

R Chinnadurai
R Aruna Jayamani

NIRD&PR

31

32

10

86

23-25
Jan

C Dheeraja
K Jayalakshmi

NIRD&PR

7

Barefoot Technicians

24 Jan
- 3 Feb

G Rajani Kanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

28

ToT

AwasSoft / Awaasapp and Framework for
Implementation of PMAY-G

30 Jan
- 3 Feb

Y Gangi Reddy
P SivaRam

NIRD&PR

54

54

7

86

Workshop

From Opportunities to Capacities : A MultiSectoral Approach to Enhancing Gender
Responsive Governance - “Programme
Working Group Meeting”

25-Jan

N V Madhuri

NIRD&PR

4

28

26

1
2

9
3

1

1

22

31

143
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

144

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

94

OFF CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
13

CGSD161713

Regional
Workshop

Gender Budgeting in Rural Development

18-20
Jan

C S Singhal

SIRD
Bhubaneswar
Odisha

31

31

14

OL161706

Seminar

Rajbhasha

19 - 20
Jan

Anita Pandey

22

22

15

CNRM161705

Regional ToT Management of Water Resources in
Over Exploited Areas

21-25
Jan

Siddayya
P Kesava Rao

NERC
Guwahati
Assam
HIRD
Nilokheri
Haryana

24

24

6

461

110

Total

352

0

29

3

0

3

49

25

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

50

50

17

18

FEBRUARY 2016
1

CESD

Workshop

Development Challenges of Transgender
People in Rural Areas

1-2
Feb

G Valentina

NIRD&PR

2

CGARD161723

Training

Geoinformatic Applications in Land Use Planning

6-11
Feb

P Kesava Rao
Ch Radhika Rani

NIRD&PR

22

22

3

CDP1617

Seminar

Participatory Decentralised Planning at the
Grassroots: Problems, Challenges and
Opportunities

9-10
Feb

R Chinnadurai
Y Bhaskar Rao
R Aruna Jayamani

NIRD&PR

36

36

4

CPME161715

Training

Evaluation of Rural Development Programmes

13-17
Feb

G V Raju

NIRD&PR

15

5

CPME

International Participatory Planning for Poverty Reduction
ITEC/SCAAP and Sustainable Development

13 Feb
- 12 Mar

R Chinnadurai
R A Jayamani

NIRD&PR

6

CICT1617

International Information Communication Technology
ITEC/SCAAP for Rural Development

13 Feb
- 12 Mar

G V Satya Narayana
& Team

7

CIAT

International Rural Technologies
CIRDAP

13-21
Feb

8

CGGPA161705

ToT

Quality Assessment and Improvement of
Public Governance

9

CSRPPPPA161705

Seminar

10

CRI

11

145

17

4

28

28

9

91

NIRD&PR

24

24

10

89

Y Gangi Reddy
and Team

Malaysia

25

25

15-17
Feb

K Prabhakar
M Sarumathy

NIRD&PR

Corporate Social Responsibility in Rural
Development

16-17
Feb

R Murugesan

NIRD&PR

ToT

AwasSoft / Awaasapp and Framework for
Implementation of PMAY-G

6-10
Feb

P SivaRam
Y Gangi Reddy

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

CRI

ToT

AwasSoft / Awaasapp and Framework for
Implementation of PMAY-G

27 Feb
- 3 Mar

Y Gangi Reddy
P SivaRam

12

CPR

Regional

Gram Panchayat Based Planning and
Management of Rural Development Programmes

20-24
Feb

13

CGARD161719

Training

Geoinformatics Applications for Planning and
Management of PMKSY

14

CGARD161718

Training

Geospatial Technology Applications for Planning and
Management of RD Projects

15

CGSD

Workshop

Gender Budgeting in Rural Development for
Master Trainers (MOWCD)

16

CGSD161714

Seminar

Gender Equality and Empowerment of
Women and Girls

17

2

5

2

15

34

1

10

2

32

9

49

49

10

88

NIRD&PR

30

30

3

80

Pratyusna Patnaik

NIRD&PR

22

22

20-25
Feb

HK Solanki
P Kesava Rao

NIRD&PR

8

21-25
Feb

T Phanindra Kumar
DSR Murthy

NIRD&PR

23

23

1-3
Feb

Sucharita Pujari

NIRD&PR

23

23

27 Feb
- 1 Mar

C S Singhal
Sucharita Pujari
N V Madhuri

NIRD&PR

46

46

2

8

5

12

15

2

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

146

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

23

1

90

2

OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
17

CNRM161706

Regional ToT Participatory Irrigation Management

6-10
Feb

Siddayya
Phanindra Kumar

YASHADA
Pune
Maharashtra

22

18

CGARD

Training

Capacity Building for Field Functionaries on
PMKSY under Watershed Development using
Geoinformatics Technology (Sponsor:
Govt. of Odisha)

6-10
Feb

DSR Murthy
T Phanindra Kumar

SIRD&PR
Bhubaneswar
Odisha

30

30

19

CCCDM161708

Regional

Convergence of Flagship Programme and
Climate Resilience

13-17
Feb

V Suresh Babu
EV Prakash Rao

ANS-SIRD
Mysuru
Karnataka

24

24

20

CPR

Regional

Second Conclave of Partnering Institutions
for PRIs

15Feb

Delhi

55

55

21

CCCDM

Regional

Strategies for Community based Disaster
Management

20-24
Feb

E V Prakash Rao
V Suresh Babu

KILA-CHRD
Kottarakara
Kerala

28

28

22

CGSD161715

Regional
Workshop
(MoWD)

Gender Budgeting in Rural Development

15-17
Feb

C S Singhal

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

31

31

23

CRTCN161707

Training
(IRMA)

How to be a Good Trainer

13-17
Feb

R P Achari
and Team

IRMA
Anand
Gujarat

24

CAS161710

Regional

Promoting Institutions and Support Systems
in Agriculture through FPOs

27 Feb
- 3 Mar

Ch Radhika Rani
K K Bhattacharya

NIRD&PR
Guwahati
Assam

39

39

25

CWE161714

Regional

Convergence of MGNREGS Works for
Strengthening Rural Livelihoods

Feb 27
- 3 Mar

P Anuradha
G Rajani Kanth

IMPA&RD
Jammu
J&K

22

22

7

520

0

0

15

26

84

88

7

13

77

12

685

94

56

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Total

S N Rao
Pratyusna Patnaik

1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

3

82

MARCH 2016
1

CRI

ToT

AwasSoft / Awaasapp and Framework for
Implementation of PMAY-G

6-10
Mar

P SivaRam
Y Gangi Reddy

NIRD&PR

20

20

2

CGSD

Seminar

Action Seminar on International Women’s Day

8Mar

N V Madhuri

NIRD&PR

55

55

3

CRTCN

Consultation NIRD&PR Strategic Vision Plan 2030

14-15
Mar

R P Achari
V K Reddy

NIRD&PR

113

113

4

CPR

Workshop

Module Writers Workshop on the Certificate
Course for Panchayat Functionaries on
Management of Panchayati Raj Institutions

20-21
Mar

Pratyusna Patnaik

NIRD&PR

7

5

CPR

Training

Orientation of RD on Panchayati Raj
for the Chairperson and ViceChairpersons of Jharkhand

20-24
Mar

S N Rao

NIRD&PR

6

Addl CPR

International Good Governance for Management of
ITEC/SCAAP RD Programmes

22 Mar
- 18 Apr

K Jayalakshmi
and Team

NIRD&PR

7

CIAT

Conclave

Rural Innovators Start-up Conclave

23-24
Mar

Y Gangi Reddy

NIRD&PR

25

8

CPR

Workshop

Master Assessors Workshop on
Certification of Master Resource Persons

27-29
Mar

Pratyusna Patnaik

NIRD&PR

10

9

OL161705

Workshop

Rajbhasha ki Avashyakatha

27-Mar

Anita Pandey

NIRD&PR

10

CHRD

Training

Management Development Programme on
Rural Development Leadership

27 Feb
- 3 Mar

Gyanmudra
T Vijaya Kumar
Lakhan Singh

NIRD&PR

10

10

11

CFL161712

Regional

Participatory Tools and Techniques for
Planning and Management of Livelihoods

14-18
Mar

G V K Lohi Das
and Team

NIRD&PR

11

11

12

CGSD161709

Training

Gender Mainstreaming Initiatives in NRLM

1-4
Mar

N V Madhuri
Sucharita Pujari

TSIPRD

32

32

13

CHRD

Workshop

Second Capacity Building and Participatory
Planning Workshop of UBA

31 Mar
- 3 Apr

Gyanmudra

NIRD&PR

32

32

14

CHRD

International HRD for Rural Development
CIRDAP

14-23
Mar

T Vijaya Kumar
Lakhan Singh
Gyanmudra

NIRD&PR

2

8

17

28

2

28

27

27
25

8

18
17

12

4

17

12

3

84

3

147
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

148

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15

16

17

18

OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMMES
15

CCCDM

Regional

Community and NGOs Initiatives in
Disaster Management

20-24
Mar

E V Prakash Rao
V Suresh Babu

16

CGGPA

Certificate
Programme

Social Accountability Tools for Good Governance

1-10
Mar

Sarumathy
K Prabhakar

17

CPR

Regional

Third Conclave of Partnering Institutions for PRIs

6-Mar

S N Rao

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

65

65

18

CGARD161724

Regional

Web Technologies and Applications for
Rural Development

20-24
Mar

K Rajeshwar

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamil Nadu

30

30

11

94

19

CSRPPPPA161704

Regional

Participatory Approaches to Rural
Livelihoods and Corporate Social
Responsibility

20 - 24
Mar

R Murugesan

SIRD
Karfectar
Sikkim

39

2

43

24

86

20

CDP161712

Regional

Strengthening other Sources of Revenue in
Panchayati Raj Institutions

7-11
Mar

Y Bhaskar Rao

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

12

6

18

5

21

CDP161713

Regional

Convergence Strategies in Rural
Development Programmes

22-26
Mar

Y Bhaskar Rao

IMPA&RD
Srinagar
J&K

20

Total

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamil Nadu

32

32

Sehgal Foundation
Haryana

29

513

29

2

20

0

36

33

16

0

39

17

654

55

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

0

1

0

0

0

0

Overall Effectiveness (%)

Female

Total

Others/PSUs/Individuals

Course Director/ Team

International

Venue

University/College

Duration

Natl. State Res.& Trg. Institutions

Type of the Programme

Vol. Organisation

Type

ZP/PRIs/VDB/VC

Code

Bankers

S.
No.

Govt. Officials

Details of Programmes and Participation Conducted at NERC, Guwahati During 2016-17

16 17 18

APRIL 2016
1

NERC161701 T

Training

Value Chain Analysis for Promotion of
Rural Livelihoods

5-9
Apr

NERC

2

NERC

Training

Mizoram Village Council Orientation
and Exposure on NRLM

1-2
Apr

NIRD&PRNERC

NRLM Cell

3

NERC

Training

Gender Training for SRLM Staff
of Meghalaya

21-23
Apr

NIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

4

NERC161702 T

Training

Pig Farming and Meat Processing for
Sustainable Livelihoods

25-30
Apr

NERC

Total

Ratna Bhuyan

K K Bhattacharjee

25

0

31
21

26

4

31

3

21

5

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

27

26

0

31

1

21

0

0

2 7 106 2 9

82

28 17 96

149
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - III

150

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

3-6
May

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

9

1

0

4

0

6

0

0

20

7

90

18-20
May

SIRD,
Ar.P

M K Shrivastava

25

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

27

6

90

4-6
May

NIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

24

24

9

26

26 12

May, 2016
NERC161707 T

Training

Rural Entrepreneurship Development

6

NERC161708 T

Training

Convergent Planning, Implementation and
Monitoring of Rural Development
Programmes under GPDP/SAGY

7

NERC

Training

Induction and Orientation of Newly
Recruited Staff of Arunachal SRLM

8

NERc

Workshop

Financial Inclusion Workshop for
North East States

12-14
May

NIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

9

NERC

Training

Mizoram Bankers Orientation and
Exposure on NRLM

26-28
May

NIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

10

NERC161710 T

Training

Applications of Open Source Software
in Rural Development

16-20
May

NERC

S K Ghosh

11

0

0

0

0

0

0

11

NERC161711 T

Training

Maintenance of Accounts under
Double Entry System for RD Programmes

16-20
May

NERC

B N Sarma
R M Pant

43

0

0

0

1

0

12

NERC2015 IES

Training

Orientation Programme for IES Probationers
(2015 Batch) on Potential of NER towards RD

16-20
May

NERC

RM Pant
K K Bhattacharjee

12

0

0

0

0

13

NERC161713 T

Training

Profitable Poultry Farming and Management

23-28
May

NERC

KK Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

101

25

0

4

Total

24

24

4

0

11

0

92

0

0

44

8

86

0

0

0

12

8

76

0

0

0

23

24

5

90

53

6

0

2 3 212 5 9 524

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

5

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

25

0

0

0

9

0

0

0

34

June, 2016
14

NERC161705 T

Training

Application of Geospatial Technologies for
Planning and Management of Rural Water
Supply Schemes under NRDWP

6-10
Jun

SIRD
Sikkim

15

NERC

Training

SRP-LP(Batch-3)

2-11
June

IIBMNIRD&PR
- NERC

16

NERC161712 T

Training

Application of Geospatial Technologies
for Resource Mapping

13-17
Jun

NERC

A Simhachalam
NSR Prasad

31

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

32

1

92

17

NERC161714 T

Training

e-Governance Applications for Rural
Development in context to the
Digital India Programme

20-24
Jun

NERC

S K Ghosh

27

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

27

2

90

18

NERC161722 T

Training

Convergent Planning, Implementation
and Monitoring of Rural Development
Programmes

22-24
Jun

NERC

36

0

14

0

0

0

0

0

50

5

84

119

0

14

0

79

1

0

0

213 4 5 346

Total

NSR Prasad
A Simhachalam

NRLM Cell

M K Shrivastava

70

8

80

70 29

151
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)

152

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

July, 2016
19

NERC161729 T

Training

Orientation on PMKSY

11-13
Jul

NERC

Dr. NSR Prasad
Dr. K. Haloi

49

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

49

20

NERC161731 T

Training

Poultry Farming and Management

11-16
Jul

NERC

K K Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

30

31 18 88

21

NERC

Training

Induction Training for Newly Recruited
Staff of Meghalaya and Mizoram

3-5
July

NIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

34

34 10

22

NERC

Workshop

National Workshop on Convergence

12-15
July

IIBMNIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

91

91 19

23

NERC

Training

Training of Bank Mitra/Bank Sakhis of
SRLMs of Meghalaya and Mizoram

27-30
July

NIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

24

NERC161731 T

Training

Orientation on Swachh Bharat Mission

1 8-20
Jul

NERC

25

NERC161730

Training

Accounting Systems in Rural
Development Programmes

18-22
Jul

SIPARD,
Tripura

26

NERC161720

Training

Rural Research Methodology

18-28
Jul

27

NERC161708 T

Training

Application of Bhuban Panchayat and
m-Assets for Decentralised Planning

2 0-22
Jul

78

25 25

R M Pant
M K Shrivastava

19

0

2

0

0

0

0

3

24

3

90

B N Sarma
R M Pant

28

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

28

4

72

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

8

5

32 20 84

NERC

NSR Prasad
K Haloi

23

0

8

0

0

1

32

128

0

10

2 7 125 1 7

0

3 9 346 117 498

2

17

0

0

9

86

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Total

25

9

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

44

0

0

0

0

0

0

2

46

August, 2016
28

NERC161739

Training

Cluster Development Approach and
Collective Marketing

1-5
Aug

NERC

29

NERC

Training

Orientation and Exposure Programme
for Bankers of Meghalaya

8-10
Aug

NIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

30

NERC

Training

Finance Professional Training for NE SRLMS

17-19
Aug

NIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

37

37 13

31

NERC

Training

Training on VO Formation, Nurturing and
Management at Mizoram

30-31
Aug

Mizoram
SRLM

NRLM Cell

59

59 19

32

NERC161719

Training

ToT on Integrated Planning for
Rural Development

17-20
Aug

NERC

33

NERC161740

Training

Bhuvan Panchayat Asset Mapping
Mobile Application for Decentralised
Planning

22-24
Aug

34

NERC161741

Training

Applications of Networking and Web
Technologies for Management of RD
Programmes

22-26
Aug

NERC

35

NERC161742

Training

Nursery Development for Sustainable
Livelihoods

22-27
Aug

NERC

Total

Ratna Bhuyan

12

7

84

12

R M Pant
M K Shrivastava

11

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

11

1

90

SIRD
NSR Prasad
Meghalaya A Simhachalam

24

0

0

1

9

0

0

0

34

7

90

S K Ghosh

23

0

6

0

0

0

0

0

29

7

90

K K Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

26

27 10 86

103

12

6

1

105

0

0

2 8 255 6 4 440

153
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)

154

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

6-9
Sep

NERC

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

13

0

8

0

0

0

0

1

22

September, 2016
36

NERC161748 T

Training

Behavioural Skills for Managing
RD Programmes

37

NERC

Training

Training of the Volunteers for the Non-intensive 14-16
Blocks under SRLM Meghalaya on NRLM
Sep
and its Processes

SIRD
NRLM Cell
MSRLM
Meghalaya

47

47 47

38

NERC

Training

VO Concept Seeding, Formation, Management 20-22
and Module Development Training.
Sep

MBC
NRLM Cell
Church Hall,
Manipur
SRLM

25

25

39

NERC

Workshop

54

54 11

40

NERC161737 T

41

42

ToTal

Livelihoods Workshop

28-30
Sep

NIRD&PRNERC

Training

Application of Geospatial Technologies
for Planning and Management of
MGNREGS

6-10
Sep

SIPARD
Tripura

NERC161749 T

Training

Application of Geospatial Technologies
for Planning and Management of
Watersheds under PMKSY

19-23
Sep

NERC161750 T

Training

Pig Farming and Meat Processing

19-24
Sep

R M Pant
Ratna Bhuyan

NRLM Cell
and NMMU,
Delhi

7

92

8

NSR Prasad
A Simhachalam

30

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

30

2

90

NERC

NSR Prasad
K Haloi

17

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

17

4

92

NERC

K K Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

27

28 14 90

61

0

8

0

126

0

0

2 8 223 9 3 364

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

3-4
Oct

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan
R M Pant

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

58

0

10

0

4

0

0

0

72

October, 2016
43

NERC161756 W Workshop

Training Need Assessment

44

NERC

Training

ToT for Transaction based MIS for
SHG (Batch I)

17-18
Oct 16

IIBM

NRLM Cell
and NMMU,
Delhi

74

74 22

45

NERC

Training

ToT for Transaction based MIS for SHG
(Batch II)

20-21
Oct 16

IIBM

NRLM Cell
and NMMU
Delhi

84

84 23

46

NERC

Training

Banker's Orientation & Exposure
Programme on FI

25-26
Oct 16

NIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

6

28

8

47

NERC

Training

SHG Concept Seeding to State Staff
of Meghalaya SRLM

27-28
Oct 16

Bethany
Society,
Shillong

NRLM Cell

11

11

2

48

Sponsored by
Govt. of AP

Training

GIS & GPS Tools and its Application
for Fisheries

3-5 Oct

NERC

K Haloi
A Simhachalam

19

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

19

2

49

NERC161758 T

Training

Poultry Farming and Management

17-22
Oct

NERC

K K Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

25

26 23 88

50

NERC161759 T

Training

Bhuvan Panchayat Mobile Application for
Decentralised Planning

19-21
Oct

NERC

A Simhachalam
K Haloi

15

0

20

0

0

0

0

1

36

7

86

51

MoRD, GoI

Regional Interactive Workshop of NLMs

24-25 Oct

NERC

K P Kumaran
K K Bhattacharjee

36

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

36

4

NA

52

NERC161743 T

Fiscal Decentralisation and Resource
Mobilisation by Panchayats

26-28 Oct

NERC

M K Shrivastava
R M Pant

5

0

14

0

0

0

0

0

19

8

98

134

22

44

0

179

0

0

2 6 405 108 360

Total

Workshop

ToT

22

9

NA

88

155
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)

156

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

NERC

S K Ghosh

32

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

November, 2016
53

NERC161766 T

Training

ICT Applications in Office Automation

7-11
Nov

54

NERC

Training

VO Concept and Management Training
for Community Trainers

2-4
Nov

SIRD
NRLM Cell
Meghalaya

21

21 21

55

NERC

Training

Training of the Volunteers under SAGY
Block on SHG Concepts

22-24
Nov

SIRD
NRLM Cell
Meghalaya

31

31 25

56

NERC

Training

Training and Capacity Building of State
Resource Persons on Livelihoods on
Agriculture and Livestock

28 Nov
-5 Dec

IIBM,
Guwahati

57

NERC161767 T

Training

Planning and Management of Low cost
IAY Rural Housing

21-25
Nov

NERC

A Simhachalam
K Haloi

21

0

9

0

0

0

0

0

30

58

NERC161768 T

Training

Pig Farming and Meat Processing

21-26
Nov

NERC

K K Bhattacharjee

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

29

31 14 94

55

0

12

52

50

0

0

2 9 198 9 2 280

Total

3

35 13 96

NRLM Cell
and NMMU,
Delhi

50

50 12

7

90

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

December, 2016
59

NERC161773 T

Training

Geospatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of PMGSY Rural Roads

5-9
Dec

NERC

A Simhachalam
K Haloi

15

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

15

1

90

60

NERC161774 T

Training

Applications of Open Source Software in
Rural Development

5-9
Dec

NERC

S K Ghosh

18

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

18

0

94

61

NERC

Training

Training on Portal based NRLM
Financial Inclusion

6-7
Dec

15

5

62

NERC

Training

Floriculture for Sustainable Livelihoods

12-17
Dec

NERC

K Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

20

21 16 90

63

NERC

Training

Accounting Systems for Rural
Development Programmes

12-16
Dec

NERC

B N Sarma
R M Pant

50

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

50

9

90

64

Addl.

Training

Enabling Digital Payments in Rural Area

21-22
Dec

NERC

R M Pant
K Haloi
S K Ghosh

49

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

49

8

90

133

2

0

0

13

0

0

2 0 168 3 9 454

Total

Mizoram NMMU, Delhi
Apex
Cooperative
Bank

2

13

157
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)

158

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

9-13
Jan

NERC

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

K Haloi
NSR Prasad
A Simhachalam

20

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

20

1

94

M K Shrivastava

24

0

10

0

0

0

0

0

34

4

92

January, 2017
Sponsored by
Govt. of
Meghalaya

Training

GIS Training for Officers of Water
Resources Department, Meghalaya

66

NERC161751

Regional

Convergent Planning and Implementation
of MGNREGS

16-20
Jan

BIPARD
Patna

67

NERC

Training

Capacity Building of Programme Staff of
Mizoram SRLM

9-10
Jan

SRLM
Mizoram

NRP and NRLM Cell

60

60 20

68

NERC

Training

Induction and Orientation of Newly
Recruited Staff of Meghalaya
and Mizoram

17-19
Jan

NIRD&PR
- NERC

NRLM Cell

44

44 14

69

NERC

Training

Induction and Orientation of Newly Recruited
Staff of ASRLMS

27-29
Jan

NIRD&PR
NERC

NRLM Cell and
NMMU, Delhi

35

35 10

70

NERC

Training

Transaction based MIS Training

3 0-31
Jan

Arunachal
SRLM

NRLM Cell and
NMMU, Delhi

25

25

8

71

Addl.

ToT

Enabling Digital Payments in Rural India

1 7-18
Jan

NERC

R M Pant
K Haloi
S K Ghosh

10

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

12

1

92

72

Addl.

Seminar

Akhil Bharatiya Rajbhasha Sammelan

19-20
Jan

NERC

R M Pant
K Saran

8

0

0

0

16

3

0

6

33

8

NA

73

NERC161783

Promotion of Rural Startups: Approaches
and Strategies

Jan 31
- Feb 3

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

20

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

20

2

82

82

0

10

0

182

3

0

6

283 6 8 360

Total

ToT

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

65

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

31

32 11 86

February, 2017
74

NERC161789

Training

Poultry Farming and Management

6-11
Feb

NERC

75

NERC

Training

Transaction based MIS Training

1-Feb

NERC

76

NERC

Induction

Second Phase of Induction for
Meghalaya SRLM

6-9
Feb

77

NERC

Workshop

Third Annual Regional Writeshop
for NE SRLMs

14 – 18
Feb

78

NERC

Induction

Induction Programme for Recruited
Staff of Assam SRLM

79

Addl.

ToT

AWASOFT/Awaasapp on Framework
for Implementation of PMAY-G

80

Total

NERC161757

Regional

Integrated Planning

K K Bhattacharjee

NRLM Cell and
NMMU, Delhi

18

18

3

IIBM
Guwahati

NRLM Cell & NRP

29

29

9

IIBM
Guwahati

NRLM Cell
& NRP

89

89 31

28 Feb
IIBM
-3 March Guwahati

NRLM Cell

58

58 11

6-10
Feb

15-17
Feb

NERC

SIRD
Mizoram

R M Pant
K Haloi“
S.K. Ghosh
M K Shrivastava
R M Pant

49

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

49

5

84

160

3

0

11

0

0

0

30

4

96

66

0

3

0

205

0

0

3 1 305 7 4 266

159
(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)

160

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17 18

13

1

13

8

27

3

0

0

65 10 NA

Mar-17
Addl.

Regional

NIRD&PR-SIRD Conclave

6
March

NERC

82

NERC

Induction

Induction Programme for Recruited
Staff of Assam SRLM

7-10
March

IIBM
Guwahati

NRLM Cell

57

57 13

83

NERC

Induction

Induction Programme for Recruited Staff
of Assam SRLM

14-17
March

NIRD&PR
Guwahati

NRLM Cell

62

62 14

84

NERC161788

Seminar

Transforming Rural Areas in North East India:
Vision for Future

8-9
March

NERC

M K Shrivastava

2

0

0

1

0

37

0

3

43 18 NA

85

NERC161781

Regional

Bhuvan Panchayat Mobile Application for
Decentralised Planning

15-17
March

Portblair
Andaman

NSR Prasad
A Simhachalam

31

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

31 14 94

86

NERC161791

Workshop

Financial Inclusion and Sustainable
Rural Development: Challenges and
Way Forward

2 1-22
March

NERC

M K Shrivastava

8

0

0

0

5

0

0

0

13

5

NA

87

NERC161797

Workshop

Application of Geospatial Technologies in
Rural Development

23-24
March

NERC

K Haloi
NSR Prasad
A Simhachalam

14

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

14

1

NA

88

NERC161724

Training

27-March
-1 April

NERC

K K Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

28

29 10 92

69

1

13

9

151 4 0

0

3 1 314 8 5 186

1077

62

151 9 4 1289 6 7

0

288 3028 873 4078

Total
Grand Total

Pig Farming and Meat Processing

Dr. R.M. Pant

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

81

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE-IV

Research Studies Taken up During 2016-17
S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

A. Research Studies
1.

Impact Evaluation of Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Dr. Sucharita Pujari
Empowerment of Adolescent Girls (SABLA) on Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar
Adolescent Health, Nutrition and Development

September, 2016

2.

Impact of PESA Act, 1996: Implementation on the Dr. R.R. Prasad
Self-governance in the Scheduled Areas of Dr. R.K. Shrivastava
Gadrhchiroli District of Maharashtra

September, 2016

3.

Impact of Extending Habitat Rights to the Baiga Dr. R.K. Shrivastava
Tribe of Madhya Pradesh State in Reducing their Dr. R.R. Prasad
Vulnerabilities

September, 2016

4.

Evaluation of SCSP / TSP – A Study of Andhra Dr. G. Valentina
Pradesh and Telangana

September, 2016

5.

Preparation of a Compendium of Case Studies on Dr. Sonal Mobar Roy
Best Practices and Case-teaching Material in Rural
Development

September, 2016

6.

Mahatma Gandhi NREGS
Comprehensive Assessment

7.

Demand Capturing and Facilitating Access to Dr. G. Rajani Kanth
Potential Wage Employment under Mahatma
Gandhi NREGS: An Explanatory Research in
Nalgonda District, Telangana

September, 2016

8.

Livelihood Analysis of Vulnerable Groups Dr. P. Anuradha
(Disabled Persons) under MGNREGS

September, 2016

9.

Safe Rural Drinking Water Supply – A Study on Dr. P. SivaRam & Team
Reverse Osmosis Plants and Water ATMs in
Selected States

September, 2016

Assets:

Its Dr. G.Rajani Kanth & Team

September, 2016

(Contd...)

161

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

10.

Sanitation Behaviour Assessment of Households
in Gram Panchayats – A Study Using Safe San Index

Dr. R. Ramesh,
Dr. P. SivaRam

September, 2016

11.

Farm based Sustainable Livelihoods Practices: A
Study in two Selected States

Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar
Dr. P. Raj Kumar

September, 2016

12.

Status of Land allotted to the Poor under Different
Land Distribution Programmes: An Evaluation in
Selected States

Dr. G.V.Krishna Lohi Das

September, 2016

13.

A Study on Convergence of IWMP with MGNREGS
and its Implications

Dr. Siddayya & Team

September, 2016

14.

Powers, Functions and Performance Gaps of DPCs
in Preparation of Integrated District Planning: A
Status Analysis

Dr. R. Aruna Jayamani,
Dr. R. Chinnadurai

September, 2016

15.

Corporate Social Responsibility Spending
Methods and Modalities: A Study on NLC and DRL

Dr. R. Murugesan & Team

September, 2016

16.

Elected Women Representatives of Grassroot
(GP) Level: A Study in Selected States

Dr. S.N. Rao

September, 2016

17.

Decentralised Planning at the Grassroots –
Problems and Opportunities – A Study in Selected
States

Dr. Y. Bhaskara Rao
Dr. R. Chinnadurai

September, 2016

18.

Effects of Inter-State Migration on the SocioEconomic Status of the Stone Quarry Workers and
Planning for Better Livelihoods

Dr. R. Chinnadurai

September, 2016

19.

Social Accountability: Application of Citizen
Report Card Method in ICDS Programme

Dr. C. Dheeraja
Dr. K. Prabhakar

September, 2016

20.

Study on Compliance of Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Audit of Scheme
Rules 2011

Dr. C. Dheeraja

September, 2016

(Contd...)

162

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

21.

GIS Based Study of Existing Community Shri H.K. Solanki
Infrastructure and Optimum Requirements at Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Gram Panchayat Level for Assessment of Gaps
using Participatory and Departmental Approach:
A Case of Gram Panchayat Hantra, District
Bharatpur, Rajasthan

September, 2016

22.

A Proposal for Monograph on Effective Monitoring Dr. K.P. Kumaran
and Evaluation of Social Sector Development
Schemes / Programmes for Functionaries of State
Government Departments

September, 2016

23.

A Quick Study on District Innovation Fund (DIF) in Dr. Rama Mohana Rao
Two States

March, 2017

B. Case Studies
24.

Generation of Geo-database on Rural Roads Dr. N.S.R.Prasad
Compatible with C-DAC Specifications and Data Shri A. Simhachalam
Standards: A Case of Dakhin Bholagaon Panchayat Dr. K. Haloi
of Rani C & RD Block, Kamrup District, Assam State

June, 2016

25.

Traditional Rural Handicraft Activities: A Case Dr. Ratna Bhuyan
Study of Mask Making in Majuli and Bell and Brass Dr. R.M. Pant
Metal Works in Sarthebari, Assam

June, 2016

26.

Successful Women Micro Entrepreneurs from Dr. Ratna Bhuyan
Rural Areas of Assam
Dr. R.M. Pant

June, 2016

27.

Horticulture for Livelihood: A Study of Dirang Dr. R.M. Pant,
Thembang Circles of West Kameng District of Dr. Ratna Bhuyan
Arunachal Pradesh
Dr. N.D. Singh, Programme
Coordinator (KVK), Dirang

June, 2016

28.

Decentralised Good Governance: A Success Story Dr. R.M. Pant
of Two Gram Panchayats in Sikkim
Dr. Ratna Bhuyan

June, 2016

(Contd...)

163

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

29.

A Case Study of Integrated Planning under Dr. M.K. Shrivastava
Autonomous District Councils (ADCs) of Manipur

June, 2016

30.

A Case Study on Communitisation of Rural Dr. M.K. Shrivastava
Development and Public Services in Nagaland

June, 2016

C. Collaborative Studies
31.

Study on Developing Protocol for the Use of Dr. Ch.Radhika Rani
Wearable Accelerometry based Devises in
Agricultural Livelihood Research in Low and
Middle Income Countries (LMICs)

March, 2017

32.

No Representation without Taxation: A Study of Dr. Carolyn Elliott
Panchayati Raj Financing and Accountability
Dr. K. Jayalakshmi

March, 2017

i) SIRDPRs
33.

Comparative Study between Annual Land
Productivity of Shifting Cultivation and Nûl
Farming (Seasonal Farming at River Bank) in
Kolasib District, Mizoram State, India

34.

Social Impact of MGNREGS Works: A Study on Mr. Malsawmtluanga
Sanitation Works In Bilkhawthlir R.D Block, Fanai,
Kolasib District: Mizoram
Mr. Lalthanmawia Ralte,
Dr. Margaret Lalbiakthangi
SIRD, Mizoram

July, 2016

35.

Impact of MGNREGA and its Sub-schemes viz., Dr. Trilochan Singh
‘Kapildhara,
BhumiShilp,
Sericulture, MGSIRD,
Horticulture on Socio-economic Conditions of Madhya Pradesh
Farmers and Employment Opportunities

July, 2016

Mr. Z.R.Thafala
Dr.Lalhruaitluangi Sailo
Mr. Lalthanmawia Ralte
SIRD, Mizoram

July, 2016

(Contd...)

164

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

36.

An Analysis of Credit and Saving Pattern of Dr. Jibini V Kurien
MGNREGS Women Workers in Kerala – Kollam and Dr.Oommen John
Shri Vinod Kumar C
Alappuzha District
Smt. Sherine Chacko
SIRD, Kerala

June, 2016

37.

Behavioural Aspects of Sanitation – A Study Dr. Oommen John
Amongst the Fishermen Community of Alappuzha Shri Vinod Kumar C
Dr.Jibini V Kurien
and Thiruvananthapuram Districts of Kerala
Smt.Sherine Chacko
SIRD, Kerala

June, 2016

38.

Health Risks of Inadequate Sanitation in Tripura

39.

Changing Livelihood Strategies among the Shri Monaj Kumar Pahari
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups in West BRAIP&RD, West Bengal
Bengal

February, 2017

40.

Exploring the Relationship between Education
and Women Empowerment and Gender Justice:
A Comparative Analysis between West Bengal,
Kerala and Mizoram

Dr. Suparna Ganguly
Dr. Manab Sen
Faculties from SIRD,
Kerala and Mizoram
BRAIP&RD, West Bengal

February, 2017

41.

Empowering Tribal Women PRI Members in Ms. Dipti Paridhi
Jharkhand but is it in Context to PESA? – A Study Kindo& Team and
SIRD&PR, Jharkhand
in Ten PESA Districts of Jharkhand

February, 2017

42.

e-Panchayat in Jharkhand – Challenges and Ms. Mini Rani Sharma
Assistant Professor-cumProposed Solutions
Assistant Director,
SIRD, Jharkhand

February, 2017

Smt. Sudakhina Mitra
SIRD, Tripura

June, 2016

(Contd...)

165

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

43.

Social Audit Unit in Mizoram: A Process Study

Mr. Khuangthansanga
Pakhuangte
Mr.K.Lalbuatsaiha,
Faculty, ETC
SIRD, Mizoram

March, 2017

44.

A Study of Change in Livelihoods Pattern of Rural
Household Participating in Small Credit & Saving
Schemes in the State of Jharkhand - A Study of
Rural HouseholdS in Four Districts of Jharkhand

Mr. Anil Kumar Yadav,
Asst.Prof.-cum Asst.
Director & Team
SIRD&PR, Jharkhand

March, 2017

45.

A Cross-Sectional Study to Evaluate the Impact of Dr. Anirban Majumder,
Cooked Mid-Day Meal Programme on Nutritional Faculty Member & Team
and Educational Status of Primary School Children BRAIP&RD West Bengal
belonging to Particularly Vulnerable Tribal
Groups (Lodha, Birhor and Toto) of West
Midnapore, Purulia an

46.

Impact of Watershed Development Programme Faculty
on Socio-economic Status and its Impact on DDU-SIRD, UP
Livelihoods, Income Standards & Behavioural
Aspects of Stakeholders

May, 2016

47.

Socio-economic Evaluation of SHG for the Women Faculty
DDU-SIRD&PR, UP
Empowerment

June, 2016

48.

Impact on National Old Age Pension Scheme / Ms.Sarita Patil
Dayanand Social Security Scheme on Socio- GIPARD, Goa
economic Status of Aged in Goa State

July, 2016

49.

A Study on the Performance of Indira Awaas Mr. Arlette Mascarenhas
GIPARD, Goa
Yojana in Goa

July, 2016

50.

Women Leadership in Local Self-Government

Ms. Siddhi Naik
GIPARD, Goa

March, 2017

July, 2016

(Contd...)

166

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

51.

Impact of Sanitation Campaign on the Behavioral Dr. Elizabeth
Change of Women in Tripura
Mr. L. Sangliana
Smt. Arpita Chaudhuri
SIRD, Tripura

August, 2016

52.

Factors Influencing the Enrolment and the Sri P.Venkatram Reddy
Retention of Students at Primary Education in Dr.K.Nageswara Rao
Telangana State (with Reference to the SC & STs) TSIPARD, Telangana

May, 2016

ii) ETCs
53.

Self-Employment through Handloom Activity: ETC, Kahikuchi,
A Case Study of Chief Minister Jivan Jyoti District-Kamrup (M),
Swaniyojan
Guwahati

October, 2016

54.

Study on Effect of Biogas Slurry on Grape Orchard GTC, Jalna,
(An experiment with a focus on changes in the Maharasthra
soil organic carbon and productivity)

October, 2016

55.

Mahatma Gandhi NREGA: A Case Study in Mavoor ETC, Taliparamba,
Gram Panchayat
Kannur District,
Kerala

October, 2016

56.

Impact of Rural Housing Programmes on ETC, Bhawanipatna,
Infrastructural Development of Rural Poor – A Dist.Kalahandi, Odisha
Case Study of Kalahandi District

October, 2016

57.

Performance of Women Representatives at GP ETC, Hailakandi,
Level: A Study in Hailakandi Block of Hailakandi Assam
District

November, 2016

58.

Socio-economic Impact of Self-Help Groups – Rajiv Gandhi State
A Study of Village Taprana, District Karnal, Haryana Institute of Panchayati
Raj and Community
Development (ETC),
Nilokheri, Karnal,
Haryana

December, 2016

(Contd...)

167

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.
59.

60.

61.

62.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

Comparative Studies between Sloping ETC, Pukpui, Lunglei,
Agricultural Land Technology (SALT) and Non- Mizoram
Sloping Agricultural Land Technology in Lunglei
District, Mizoram, India

January, 2017

A Study on Socio-economic Profile and RIRD, Pratapgarh, UP
Assessment of Knowledge Level and Training
Needs of Dairy Farmers of Pratapgarh District

March, 2017

Impact of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan in East Garo ETC, Dakopgre, Tura,
Hills District
Meghalaya
Performance and Status of Maintenance of Regional Institute of PR
Records of Gram Panchayats in Haryana (Financial & CD, Bhiwani, Haryana
Year 2015-16)

October, 2016

December, 2016

iii) Studies on MGNREGA
63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

Perception of Users, Quality and Durability of IIPA, New Delhi
Assets Created under MGNREGA: A Study of Four
Districts In Bihar

March, 2017

Socio-economic Impacts of Category– B Assets Council for Social
under MGNREGS: Income and Livelihood Development,
Promotion among Para - 5 Beneficiaries
New Delhi

March, 2017

Socio-economic and Gender based Evaluation of Administrative Staff
Individual Category-B Assets under MGNREGA in College of India (ASCI),
Telangana
Hyderabad

March, 2017

Geospatial Analysis and Impact of MGNREGA on Administrative Staff
Water Conservation and Rejuvenation of Water College of India (ASCI),
bodies
Hyderabad

March, 2017

Assessment of the Convergence Activities under IIT Kharagpur
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA in Odisha

March, 2017

(Contd...)

168

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

68.

Adaptation to Climate Change and Sustainable
Development: A Study of Convergence Initiatives
under MGNREGA in West Bengal

IIT Kharagpur

March, 2017

69.

Impact of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Programme on Distress
Migration: A Study of Selected States of India

GB Pant Social Science
Institute, Allahabad

March, 2017

70.

Assessments of the Assets Constructed under
MGNREGA: User Perception, Technical Quality
and Verification

Centre for Research In
Rural and Industrial
Development,
Chandigarh

March, 2017

71.

Assessment of Convergence Activities under
MGNREGA in Uttarakhand

Indian Institute of
Technology, Roorkee

March, 2017

72.

Assessment of Methodologies for Time and
Motion Studies for SoRs under MGNREGA - Study
of Applicability of Kanban System in MGNREGA

Indian Institute of
Management (IIM),
Kashipur, Uttarakhand

March, 2017

73.

Documentation of Successful Practices and
Scalable Models under MGNREGA in Himachal
Pradesh

IIT Mandi,
Himachal Pradesh

March, 2017

74.

Impact of MGNREGA on Agricultural and
Livelihood Vulnerability Reduction: A Study in
Four States of India

Indian Institute of
Forest Management
(IIFM), Nehru Nagar
Bhopal

March, 2017

75.

Assessment of Financial Inclusion under
MGNREGA - Examining the Role of MGNREGA in
Financial Inclusion in Uttarakhand

Indian Institute of
Management (IIM),
Kashipur, Uttarakhand

March, 2017

76.

MGNREGA, Asset Creation and Rural
Development: An Evaluation of Category-B
Assets in Selected States

Centre for Women’s
Development Studies,
New Delhi

March, 2017

(Contd...)

169

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE-iv (Contd...)
S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

77.

Assessment of Water Conservation and Indian Institute of
Rejuvenation of Water Bodies (including rivers) Management, Kashipur,
under MGNREGA: Lessons from Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand
Uttarakhand

March, 2017

78.

Impact of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act on the Migration of
Tribal Folk: A Case Study in Junglemahal District
of West Bengal

March, 2017

170

B.R.Ambedkar Institute
of Panchayats and
Rural Development,
West Bengal

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE-V

Research Studies Completed : 2016-17
S. No. Title of the Study

Team

A. Research Studies
1.

ITKS in CSBs; Coping Mechanisms to Address Crop Failure

Dr. G.Valentina

2.

Participatory Decentralised Planning and Inclusive Development
of Marginalised Sections – An Analysis of Selected Better
Performing GPs

Dr. R.Chinnadurai
Dr. R.Aruna Jayamani

3.

Study on Indebtedness among IAY Beneficiary HouseholdsA Study in Selected Sates

Dr. Y. Gangi Reddy
Dr. P. SivaRam

4.

Nature and Extent of Tenancy Arrangements in Godavari and
Kaveri Delta Zones: A Comparative Study

Dr. K.Suman Chandra &
Team

B. Case Studies
5.

Case Study on Process Documentation of Social Audit of
Integrated Watershed Management Programme

Dr. K.Prabhakar
Dr. Siddayya
Dr. U.Hemantha Kumar

6.

Case Study on Evaluating Implementation of Jan Dhan Yojana

Dr. B.K.Swain

7.

Solid Waste Management in Rural Areas

Dr. R.Ramesh
Dr. P.SivaRam

8.

Case Study on Best Practices in Rural Development:
A Case study of Punsari Gram Panchayat in Gujarat

Dr. P.SivaRam
Dr. R.Ramesh

C. Collaborative Studies
9.

Post-Disaster Recovery: Assessment of Needs in Moderate Flood
Conditions in Collaboration with Rahara Abhikshan, Kolkata

Dr.K.Suman Chandra

10.

Awareness Building in IWMP – A Case Study

HIPA, Himachal Pradesh

11.

Women Empowerment through Systematic Formation and
Development of SHGs

MGSIRD&PR,
Madhya Pradesh
(Contd...)

171

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE-VI

Research Studies On-Going : 2016-17
S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

A. Research Studies
1.

Performance Audit of RSETI/REDP Enterprises in
Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh

Dr. T. G.Ramaiah

June, 2015

2.

Livelihood Promotion through Community Based
Organisations: A Study Across Six States

Dr.N.V.Madhuri
Dr.Shankar Chatterjee
Dr. U.Hemantha Kumar

June, 2015

3.

Study of the Impact of the Climate Change on the
Natural Resources and Rural Livelihoods to
Develop Spatial Decision Support System (SDSS)
Using Geo-informatics Technology

Dr. P.Kesava Rao
Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Shri H.K.Solanki
Shri D.S.R.Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V.Madhava Rao

March, 2016

4.

Generation of Sustainable Village Resources
Development Plans Using Participatory
GIS Approach (Based on Sansad Adarsh Gram
Yojana (SGSY) Scheme)

Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Shri D.S.R.Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi

October, 2015

5.

Status of Devolution of Functions, Functionaries
and Finances for Rural Local Bodies in Select
States: Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand and Odisha

Dr. Y.Bhaskar Rao

June, 2015

6.

Democratic Decentralisation and Tribal SelfGovernance: A Study of Implementation of
PESA Act in two States

Dr. Prathyusna
Patnaik

June, 2015

7.

Distributional Equity of Rural Drinking Water:
A Study on Inclusive Service Delivery

Dr. P.SivaRam
Dr. R.Ramesh

March, 2016

8.

Participatory Irrigation Management through
Water User Associations: An Assessment of Some
Selected Irrigated Command Areas

Dr.U.Hemantha Kumar
Dr. Siddayya
Dr.K.Prabhakar

March, 2016

(Contd...)

172

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

B. Case Studies
9.

A Case Study of Successful Livelihood
Interventions among Chenchus

Dr. N.V.Madhuri

July, 2015

10.

A Case Study on Livelihoods Initiatives and
Standard of Living of Particularly Vulnerable
Tribal Groups in Madhya Pradesh

Dr. R.Murugesan

July, 2015

C. Collaborative Studies
11.

Major Livelihood Sources among Chenchus
(PTG)- A Case Study of Mahabubnagar
Dist. Andhra Pradesh

AMR-APARD,
Andhra Pradesh

2012-13

12.

Impact Assessment of MGNREGS on Livelihoods
of Drought-Prone Areas : A Case Study of
Mahabubnagar Dist. of Andhra Pradesh

AMR-APARD,
Andhra Pradesh

2012-13

13.

Study on Factors Facilitating Participation of
Women in Mahatma Gandhi NREGA in
Himachal Pradesh

HIPA,
Himachal Pradesh

2013-14

14.

Livelihood Projects/Micro Enterprises through
SHGs

Arunachal Pradesh

2014-15

15.

Impact of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) on Rural
People of Tripura

SIPARD, Tripura

2015-16

173

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE-VII

Action Research Studies : 2016-17
S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

A. Completed Studies
1

Development of Model Village as per SAGY

Dr. Gyanmudra
Dr. Sarumathy

2015-16

2

Promotion of Rural Entrepreneurship &
Enterprises through Livelihoods Cluster
Approach: A Pilot Initiative in Action
Research.

Dr. Kanak Haloi
Dr. Ratna Bhuyan

2014-15

3

Action Research in Coimbatore, Villapura and
Sivaganga Districts of Tamil Nadu by Shri Amm
Chettiar Research Institute - Tamil Nadu

Dr. V.SureshBabu

2012-13

4

The Forgotten Category - Rural Artisans Transformation into Rural Entrepreneurs

SEDYAM, Hyderabad

2014-15

B. On-going Studies
1

Village Adoption - Action Research Mode in
Sirkunti and Mamdapur Villages of Astha
Northern Block of Vardha District by CSV Vardha Maharashtra

Dr. V.Suresh Babu

2012-13

2

Village Adoption - Action Research Mode in Tehri
Dist. by HISCO, Dehradun - Uttarakhand

Dr. V.Suresh Babu

2012-13

3

Enhancement of Forest based Livelihoods
through Conservation and Regeneration
Strategies in Eastern Ghats Hinterland

Shri V.Krishna Rao,
Kovel Foundation
Dr. M.V.Rao
Dr. G.Rajani Kanth

2012-13

4

Village Disaster Risk Management Plan
(VDRMP) at Rasapettai Village in Cuddalore
District of Tamil Nadu

SIRD&PR, Tamil Nadu
and C-GARD
Faculty

2015-16

5

Formation of Model Village

MGSIRD&PR, MP

2012-13

174

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE-VIII

Village Adoption Studies Completed / On-going : 2016-17
S. No.

State

District

Village

Team

A. Completed / Closed
1.

Andhra Pradesh

Prakasam

Mohiuddinpuram

Dr. N. Kalpalatha
Dr. Padmaja
Ms. Zareena

2.

Chhattisgarh

Dhamtari

Sonjhari

Dr. V. Annamalai

3.

Chhattisgarh

Bastar

Tirathgarh

Dr. S.N. Rao

4.

Chhattisgarh

Dhamtari

Tumrabahar

Dr. T.G. Ramaiah

5.

Karnataka

Chamarajanagar

Hosapodu
Hiriiyambala
Kathakalpadu
Havinamula

Dr. V. Suresh Babu

6.

Karnataka

Gulbarga

Vantichinta

Dr. K. Jayalakshmi
Dr. G. Valentina

7.

Karnataka

Bidar

Vittalpura

Dr. Ch. Radhika Rani

8.

Madhya Pradesh

Dhar

Moosapura
Kofisondpur

Dr. N.V. Madhuri

9.

Madhya Pradesh

Chhattarpur

Patori

Dr. R.K. Srivastava

10.

Maharashtra

Chandrapur

Ashapur

Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar

11.

Maharashtra

Chandrapur

Kotban

Shri D.S.R. Murthy

12.

Maharashtra

Nanded

Somarla

Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Dr. R. Chinnadurai

13.

Odisha

Koraput

Mandikuta

Dr. B.K. Swain
(Contd...)

175

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE-viii (Contd...)
S. No.

State

District

Village

Team

14.

Odisha

Cuttack

Naraz

Dr. Debapriya

15.

Rajasthan

Udaipur

Amarpura

Dr. K. Prabhakar
Dr. Siddayya

16.

Rajasthan

Bharatpur

Hantra Revenue
Village

Shri H. K. Solanki
Dr. P. Kesava Rao

17.

Rajasthan

Sawai Madhopur

Sawai Ganj

Dr. G. V. Raju

18.

Tamil Nadu

Cuddalore

Sirumangalam

Dr. R. Murugesan

19.

Tamil Nadu

Dindigul

Manaloor

Dr. Ramesh

20.

Telangana

Warangal

Kottapalli

Dr. P. Anuradha

21.

Uttar Pradesh

Mahoba

22.

West Bengal

Bankura

Seulibona

Dr. Shankar Chatterjee

Dr.K. Suman Chandra

B. On-going
1.

Telangana

Mahabubnagar

Appapur

Dr. P. SivaRam
Dr. Y. Gangi Reddy
Md. Khan

2.

Telangana

Mahabubnagar

Hajipally

Dr. Y. Gangi Reddy
Dr. P. SivaRam

3.

Assam

Moregaon

Hatiutha

Dr. K. Haloi

4.

Assam

Kamrup

Jajikona

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. K. Mukesh Kumar
Srivastava

5.

Assam

Nalbari

Kathora

Dr. K. Haloi
Shri A. Simhachalam

6.

Odisha

Koraput

Khudi

Dr. Y. BhaskarRao

7.

Odisha

Sundargarh

Sasa

Dr. G.V.K. Lohidas
Dr. A. Debapriya

176

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE-IX

Consultancy Studies : 2016-17
S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

A. Studies Taken Up
1.

Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) –
Performance Evaluation Report - 2017-18

Dr. Gyanmudra

April, 2016

2.

Preparation of District Irrigation Plan under
PMKSY

Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Shri H.K.Solanki
Dr. P.Kesava Rao
Shri D.S.R.Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V.Madhava Rao

April, 2016

3.

Impact Assessment of Performance of
Andhra Pradesh Non-Governmental
Organisations Alliance (APNA)

Dr. G.Rajani Kanth
Dr. S.V.Rangacharyulu

January, 2017

4.

Study on Productive Assets under Mahatma
Gandhi NREGS and its Impact on Sustainable
Livelihoods of the Rural Poor in Telangana
with Special Emphasis on Horticulture,
Land Development and Irrigation

Dr. G.Rajani Kanth
Dr. S.V.Rangacharyulu

February, 2017

5.

Study on Mahatma Gandhi NREGS Impact on
Socio-economic Conditions of Wage Seekers in
Rural Telangana

Dr. G.Rajani Kanth
Dr. S.V.Rangacharyulu

February, 2017

B. Completed Studies
1.

Adoption of Low Performance Districts under
MGNREGA in the States of Uttar Pradesh
(Bundelkhand region), Assam, Karnataka
(Hyderabad-Karnataka region) and Rajasthan

Dr. G.Rajani Kanth

2.

Evaluation Study of Foreclosed Watershed
Projects under IWDP, DPAP and DPAP (2014-17)

Dr. Siddayya
Dr. U.Hemantha Kumar
Dr. K.Prabhakar
Dr. Ch.Radhika Rani
Shri S. Vijayachandra
Reddy

(Contd...)

177

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

3.

Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY)– 2016-17

Dr. Gyanmudra

4.

Nutrition and Education Status of Children
between 4-7 Years from Women-headed
Households under MGNREGA and Women
headed Households not under MGNREGA:
A Comparative Study

Dr. Lakhan Singh

5.

Study on the Socio-economic Reasons for
Migration and Impact of Government
programmes on Migrant Families in Bolangir
District, Odhisha

Dr. G.Rajani Kanth
Shri H.Kurma Rao
Dr. P. Anuradha

6.

Promoting Women ‘s Political Leadership and
Gender Responsive Governence in India

Dr. C.S.Singhal & Team

7.

Agro-climate Planning and Information Bank
(APIB) Project for Champawat and Dehradun
District of Uttarakhand -Deployment of SDSS in
Two Districts

Dr. V.Madhava Rao
Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Dr. R.R.Hermon
Dr. P.Kesava Rao
Shri D.S.R.Murthy
Shri H.K.Solanki

8.

Impact Evaluation Study of Nereda Watershed
Project of Nalgonda District

Dr. Siddayya
Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Ms. Vijayalakshmi

Commenced during

C. On-going Studies
1.

Setting up of Geoinformatics Centres for RD in
five African Countries

Dr. V.Madhava Rao
Dr.P.Keasava Rao
Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Shri H.K.Solanki
Shri D.S.R.Murthy

July, 2015

(Contd...)

178

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

2.

Establishment of CGARD Centres at SIRD&PR,
TN & Kerala

Dr. V.Madhava Rao
Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P.Kesava Rao
Shri D.S.R.Murthy

July, 2015

3.

Socio-economic Impact of MGNREGSLongitudinal Study in Six States

Dr. G.Rajani Kanth
Dr. V.Suresh Babu
Dr. S.V.Rangacharyulu

September, 2015

4.

Impact of MGNREGA on Distress Migration in
the Vulnerable Communities- A Cohort MidTerm Repeated Measures Study in four States

Dr. Pratyusna Patnaik
Dr. G.Rajani Kanth
Dr. V.Suresh Babu

September, 2015

5.

Training Extension and Support for Online
Watershed Estimation, E-DPR and GeoHydrogeology Model Preparation under
Watershed Component of PMKSY

Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P.Kesava Rao
Shri H.K.Solanki
Shri D.S.R.Murthy
Dr. V.Madhava Rao

October, 2016

6.

Validation of APIB Dehradun Database Project

Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P.Kesava Rao
Shri H.K.Solanki
Shri D.S.R.Murthy
Dr.Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr.V.Madhava Rao

June, 2016

7.

District Rural Roads Plan on GIS Platform for
PMGSY-II in Five Districts of Kerala

Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P.Kesava Rao
Shri H.K.Solanki
Shri D.S.R.Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V.Madhava Rao

August, 2013

(Contd...)

179

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE-ix (Contd...)
S. No.

Title of the Study

Team

Commenced during

8.

Application of Space Technology in Rural Roads
Project under PMGSY

Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P.Kesava Rao
Shri H.K.Solanki
Shri D.S.R.Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V.Madhava Rao

January, 2016

9.

Evaluation Study of Bijju KBK Plan

Dr. A.Debapriya
Shri T.Phanindra Kumar
Dr. S.P.Ray
Dr. V.Madhava Rao

January, 2016

180

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE-X

Recommendations of National
Colloquium of Extension Training
Centres held on 2-3rd June, 2016 at
NIRD&PR, Hyderabad
I.

Training and Research
1. With the changes in the approaches,
systems, institutional mechanisms and
processes and with the increasing role of
local governance and panchayati raj
institutions as also community based
organisations, ETCs as frontline training
institutions are expected to play a key role
in capacity building of cutting edge level
functionaries. Therefore, the perspective of
the ETCs needs to be reviewed and enlarged
to reflect the changing rural development
scenario. ETCs should not be limited to
mandatory programmes but should
diversify into new areas and other
dimensions relevant to poverty.
2. It was observed that though ETCs have been
organising programmes for capacity building
of functionaries on new development
initiatives of flagship programmes of MoRD,
there was no regularity in the same. It is
therefore, recommended that the efforts in
this regard need to be systematised to
ensure that the programmes are organised
regularly.
3. An analysis of average number of
programmes organised per year vis-a-vis the

existing infrastructure and human resource
available, indicated that the capacity of ETCs
was not fully tapped. Efforts have to be
made to ensure optimum utilisation of the
existing capacity. As part of it, ETCs have to
adopt a systematic approach and develop
annual action plan based on assessment of
training needs. Training needs analysis of
all stakeholders should be carried out once
in three years.
4. As part of measures for quality
management, training materials have to be
developed in the form of trainer and trainee
modules and manuals. Besides, the training
methods should be oriented to be more
experiential and participatory. As part of it,
discussion based methods, immersion
method, exposure visits to sites of best
practices and success stories should be
utilised in the training programmes.
5. The role of ETCs in the area of research was
found to be conspicuous by absence. Given
the importance of feedback on the on-going
development programmes and also the
need for training inputs based on ground
realities, ETCs are expected to have research
as part of their perspective. It is therefore
recommended that studies in the form of
documentation / case studies on success
stories, best practices, impact assessment,
etc., be taken up. Besides, action research
on the implementation processes and
adoption of resource panchayats will be
(Contd...)

181

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

II.

useful for improving the effectiveness of
development initiatives and the efforts of
panchayati raj institutions.

Additional subject areas from the line
departments can be added as per requirement
of ETCs.

6. ETCs shall be involved in all research
activities taken up by the SIRD&PRs and
NIRD&PR for which continuous enrichment
and follow-up by NIRD&PR is required. ETCs
can also be involved in continuing education
programmes planned by NIRD&PR in the
form of Certificate Courses.

9. With a view to facilitate ETCs to play their
roles envisaged effectively, it is
recommended that faculty development
programmes be organised by NIRD&PR and
other national institutions. The programmes
should be not only for subject upgradation
but also to develop competence in the
methodological aspects of training and
research. In addition to regular faculty, ETCs
should have trainers on call drawn from field
functionaries, retired professionals, NGOs
etc. These trainers should be certified and
charted trainers. Besides, before joining as
a faculty member he/she should be
attached to GP level or block level/field for
at least three months to gain practical
experience.

Faculty and Administration
7. There is a need for permanent and regular
faculty in all ETCs. Norms should be
developed for the deputed faculty
members to work in ETCs for a minimum
period of five years. Three types of faculty
members / resource persons need to be
created:
z

Regular faculty

z

Eminent resource persons with wide
experience and academic qualifications

z

Master trainers from different fields

8. As far as subject areas of the faculty are
concerned, the following six core faculties
are suggested:
i. Panchayati Raj

III.

Finance, Central Sector Scheme and Revised
Guidelines of MoRD
10. The following are suggested with regard to
the revised guidelines on Central Sector
Scheme of MoRD for Recurring and Nonrecurring Grants
11.1 Cost norms for recurring grants
A. Training

ii. Planning
iii. Rural Development

No. of participants-30

iv. IT and E-Governance

No. of training days- 3 days

v. Women Empowerment

Total No. of Training Programmes in a
year-14

vi. Sanitation and Health

(Contd...)

182

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Items
Food & Llodging
Training Kit
Reading Materials
Resource Person/Guest Speaker
Study Tour/Field Trip
TA for Non-govt. Participants
Misc. (Generator, POL, taxi,
Banner, Photography, Videography,
and Institutional Charges
@ 10% of total cost)

Rate
` 350x3daysx30
` 200x30
` 100x30
` 700x6 classes
Lumpsum
Lumpsum

Amount (`)
31,500.00
6,000.00
3,000.00
4,200.00
5,000.00
5,000.00

Lumpsum
Total

15,000.00
69,700.00
Say 70,000.00

Fourteen programmes can be conducted with ` 10 lakh approximately
B.

Other Expenditure

panchayati raj functionaries, MoRD and MoPR
should give instructions to State Governments
for allocation of funds to SIRD&PR/ETCs.
Implementing agencies of Central schemes like
MGNREGA /IWMP(PMKSY), SBM,PMGSA, Gram
Udhay se Bharat Udhay, NRLM,IAY, etc., (flagship
programmes) should earmark funds for training
by SIRD&PRs and ETCs.

50 per cent of ` 20 lakh to be earmarked for salary,
TA, maintenance, purchase of books, etc.
11.2 Recurring grant must be enhanced to ` 40 lakh
per ETC per annum. One time release of fund
(recurring grant) in the month of April every
year for continuity of training was proposed. In
respect of non-recurring grant, as selection of
contractor before release of funds normally
takes considerable time release of first
instalment at the initial stage is suggested as
was done in the past.
11.3 The audit compliance required in the proposed
guidelines can never be fulfilled by the CA or
the financial team at ETCs. Therefore, the
present system and the guidelines in force
should continue for facilitating the ETCs to avail
of grants from the Ministry.
11.4 As regards funds for organising training
programmes for rural development and

IV.

Physical Infrastructure
12 MoRD has been providing non-recurring
grants for developing infrastructure
facilities, procurement of teaching aids,
office furniture, other equipment, teaching
aids like computers, audio visual
equipment, library and recreation facilities
for the participants. The following criteria
may be considered while sanctioning the
funds:
a) Average of number of training days
generated in last five years
(Contd...)

183

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

V.

b) No. of trainees imparted training in last
five years

b. Adequate modern technologies and
training equipment

c) Training load (Number of programmes for
RD, PRI staff and Representatives)

c. Digitised database of faculty and
repository of training materials

d) Total number of faculty members and
supporting staff

d. Subject experts should be developed
from among the teaching faculty

e) Total fund allotted for ETCs by State
government in the last five years

e. ETCs should develop in specific areas of
specialisation

Alagh Committee Recommendations on ETCs
and Networking

16 Networking between SIRD&PRs and ETCs
and NIRD&PR:

13 District Institutes of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj (DIRDPR) should be
established after analysing the local need.
Establishment of DIRDPRs should not leave
ETCs devoid of work. ETCs should work as
mentor for the region. When DIRDPRs are
established, the role of ETCs and DIRDPRs
should be clearly defined.

a. SIRD&PR should be the apex training
institute at the state level

14 Various district level institutes of
Government departments should be
brought on to a common platform. ETCs and
DIRDPRs should work in unison
complementing each other.

d. E-enabled classroom, GIS and modern
methodologies

15 Requirements for development of ETCs as
proposed by Dr. Alagh Committee should be
fully met. As regional institutions for
mentoring the proposed district institutes
of rural development, the ETCs should be
given the following facilities:
a. Good physical infrastructure and human
resources

b. Digitised database of teaching faculty
with areas of specialisation
c. Frequent movement of faculties
between SIRD&PR, NIRD&PR, ETC,
DIRDPR

e. Idea sharing
f. Digitised mapping, pursuing action and
applied research
g. Administrative, institutional and
academic networking
h. Developing common platform for all
training units
i. NIRD&PR should be a guiding force to all
units by providing them with latest data,
research outcomes, key decisions,
training methodologies and materials
(Contd...)

184

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

17 Use of satellite mode of distance learning,
especially for conduct of outreach training
programmes for the elected representatives
of PRIs at the block and GP level,

100 – 75 Marks
74-55 Marks
54-35 Marks
Below 35 Marks

- A Grade
- B Grade
- C Grade
- D Grade

18 Criteria for grading of ETCs :
1.
2.
3.

Preparation of Action Plan
Outreach Programmes
Training of RD, PRIs
and CBOs Representatives
4. Training Quality System
5. Research
6. Human Resource Management
7. Financial Management
8. Physical Resource Management
9. Achievement of Target
10. Networking
Total

10
10
15
20
05
10
05
05
15
05
100

185

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE - XI

Skill and Enterpreneurship Development Programmes Organised by
RTP: 2016-17
S. No.

Name of the Programme

Dates

Male

Female

Total

1

Vermicomposting a Neem Products

11 – 13 April, 16

13

-

13

2

Housing Technologies

18-22 April, 16

13

02

15

3

Leaf Plate Making

27-30 April, 2016

02

25

27

4

Vermicomposting and Neem Products

28-30 April, 2016

15

-

15

5

Cost-effective Housing Technologies

23-28 May, 2016

06

04

10

6

Rural Technology Alliance

11 June,2016

30

03

33

7

Vermicomposting and NADEP Compost

17-18 June, 2016

44

05

49

8

Vermicomposting and NADEP Compost

20-21 June, 2016

39

03

42

9

Rural Technologies and AC & ABC Scheme
in Collaboration with MANAGE

12-16 July,2016

30

02

32

10

Mud Block Making for a team of
West Bengal

18-22 July, 2016

0

19

19

11

Collaborative Programme on Agri Clinic and
Agri Business Scheme in collaboration with
MANAGE

16-20 August, 2016

30

0

30

12

Mushroom Cultivation and Processing

22-25 August, 2016

11

03

14

13

Cost-effective Housing Technologies
for Masons

29 August to
7 September, 2016

09

0

09

14

Prototype Housing Technologies for Engineers
and Assistant Engineers

29 August to
7 September, 2016

23

0

23

15

Mud Block Making

29 August to
7 September, 2016

06

2

09

(Contd...)

186

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Name of the Programme

Dates

Male

Female

Total

16

Leaf Plates Making for a Team of West Bengal

6 to 10 September,
2016

30

0

30

17

National Workshop on Rural Housing

23-24 September,
2016

65

5

70

18

Home based Products

27 – 30 September,
2016

02

10

12

19

Skill Development Programme under
Surya Mitra Scheme of NISE

26 Sept to
24 Dec, 16
( 3 months )

30

-

30

20

Housing Technologies (Prototype)
for Engineers

13 -22 October,
2016

29

-

29

21

Mud Block Making for Masons

13-12, October,
2016

11

02

13

22

Mud Block Making for Masons

7-16 Nov, 16

06

04

10

23

Skill Development Programme under
Surya Mitra Scheme of NISE

11 Nov-16 to
10 Feb, 17
(3 months)

30

-

30

24

Natural Dyeing (INDIGO)

1 to 17 December,
2016

10

02

12

25

Solar Products Assembling

15 – 29 December

26

02

28

26

Soya Food Processing

18-21 January,
2017

17

-

17

27

Mud Block Making

1-10 February,
2017

19

01

20

28

Mud Block Making

20 February -1
March, 2017

21

-

21

29

Skill Development Programme under
Surya Mitra Scheme of NISE

17 November
22 February 2017
at IRM Guwahati

30

-

30

187

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE- XII

Exposure Visits Organised by RTP : 2016-17
S.No Name of the programme

Date

Male

Female

Total

1

Exposure Visit to RTP-NIRD&PR from RUDSETI,
Anantapur

24-25 June,
2016

19

06

25

2

Exposure Visits for A.F. Ecology Centre of
Anantapur District

14-15 july,
2016

18

14

32

3

Exposure Visits for Burugula Batch-I Village
of Mahabubnagar

17 August,
2016

14

4

18

4

Exposure Visits for Kandukur Village of
Prakasam

26-27 August,
2016

13

08

21

5

Exposure Visits for Burugula Batch-II
Village of Mahabubnagar

27 August,
2016

02

52

54

6

Exposure Visits for Burugula Batch-III
Village of Mahabubnagar

2 September,
2016

45

-

45

7

Exposure Visit for Rajahmundry of
Andhra Pradesh

30-31
January, 2017

04

28

32

8

Exposure Visit for Malkangiri of Odisha

10-11
February, 2017

06

08

14

9

Exposure Visit for SHGs Members of
Sangareddy District of Telangana

15 February,
2017

-

35

35

10

Exposure Visit for Rajahmundry of
Andhra Pradesh

17-18 February,
2017

03

32

35

188

CBI

CBI

CBI

CBI

CBI

CBI

CBI

CBI

CBI

CBI

CBI

CBI

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

DENA 1

2

1

CBI

10

BoB

CBI

9

Y

Y

BoB

DENA

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Fng

BoB

PNB

CBI

8

1

CBI

7

PNB

CBI

CBI

CBI

4

5

CBI

3

6

CBI

CBI

1

CBI

BoI

BANK

2

1

BoI

S.N

Rajnandgaon

Bundi

(Amethi)

Gauriganj

Matkijaroli

Saharanpur

Yavatmal

Jalgaon

Seoni

Sagar

R a i se n

Narsinghpur

Morena

Mandsaur

Gwalior

Betul

Balaghat

Anuppur

Surguja

Koria

West Champaran

Siwan,

Saran

Madhubani

Katihar

Gopalganj

East Champaran

Darbhanga

Koderma

RSETI

Chhattisgarh

Rajasthan

U.P.

U.P.

Maharashtra

Maharashtra

M.P.

M.P.

M.P.

M.P.

M.P.

M.P.

M.P.

M.P.

M.P.

M.P.

Chhattisgarh

Chhattisgarh

Bihar

Bihar

Bihar

Bihar

Bihar

Bihar

Bihar

Bihar

Jharkhand

STATE

50.00

50.00

50.00

50.00

50.00

50.00

50.00

50.00

Installment

1st

50 LAKHS

100.00

9984093.00

100.00

87.40

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

9141770.00

8906873.00

9307900.00

100.00

Installment

2nd

100 LAKHS

100.00

50.00

99.84093

100.00

87.40

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

50.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

50.00

100.00

100.00

50.00

50.00

91.4177

89.06873

50.00

50.00

50.00

93.079

100.00

Total Grant

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

(Contd...)

20/5/2016

31-05-2017

8/12/2016

31-03-2017

1/4/2017

27-03-2017

5/1/2017

Mar-17

15-11-2016

14-May

20/9/2016

31-01-2017

1/10/2016

23/6/2016

20-10-2016

31-03-2017

28/10/2016

31/10/2016

22-03-2017

25-03-2017

25-03-2017

27-03-2017

23-03-2017

25-03-2017

1/4/2017

27-03-2017

3/11/2016

COMPLTD DATE

ANNEXURE- XIII

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

189

190

LHO
BHU

LHO
DEL

LHO
DEL

LHO
PTNA

LHO

3

4

5

6

7

1

1

1

UCO

SBP

13

ING

SBH

12

P&S

SBH

UCO

ING

P&S

OBC

SBH

10

11

1

Y

LHO
MUM

9

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

LHO
PTNA

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Fng

8

PTNA

LHO
BHU

DENA

5

2

DENA

4

LHO
BHU

DENA

3

1

DENA

2

OBC

SBI

BANK

S.N

Balasore

Bagalkot

Faridkot

Palwal

Patiala,

Hingoli

Raichur

Karimnagar,

Washim

Deoghar

Purnia

Kishanganj

Firozabad

Almora,

Nabarangpur

Boudh

Bolangir/
Balanagar

Haveli,

Silvassa, D&N

Himatnagar

Sabarkanta-

Mehsana

Kutch (Bhuj)

RSETI

Odisha

Karnataka

Punjab

Haryana

Punjab

Maharashtra

Karnataka

T.S.

Maharashtra

Jharkhand

Bihar

Bihar

U.P.

Uttarakhand

Odisha

Odisha

Odisha

UT

Gujarat

Gujarat

Gujarat

STATE
Installment

1st

50 LAKHS

100.00
100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

82.59

100.00

100.00

89.51

97.84

100.00

100.00

100.00

98.91

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

87.19

100.00

100.00

100.00

Total Grant

100.00

100.00

100.00

82.59

100.00

100.00

89.51

96.88320

100.00

100.00

100.00

98.91

100.00

100

100

100

87.19

100.00

100.00

100.00

Installment

2nd

100 LAKHS

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

COMPLETED

9/8/2016

24-1-2017

36/5/2016

15/2/2017

20/8/2016

22/5/2016

8/5/2016

Dec-16

5/5/2016

31/8/2016

31/8/2016

31/8/2016

10/9/2016

30/1/2017

Jan-17

Jan-17

Jan-17

30-04-2017

17/9/2016

9/6/2016

30/7/2016

COMPLETED COMPLTD DATE

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE- XIV

Consultative Workshop on
Transforming India – Role of
NIRD&PR held on 14-15th May, 2016
Summary of deliberations of the workshop is as
follows:
Theme I: Sustainable Livelihood Interventions (Farm
and Non-Farm)
It was pointed out that the dependency on agriculture
is coming down and the people are migrating to
service and support sectors. The latest NSSO data
indicates that percentage of people dependent on
agriculture is of the order of about 50. It is no more
rural India and the landscape is fast changing. The
issue of youth leaving villages and migrating towards
towns and cities causing a stress on economies was
highlighted. They have high aspirations but consider
land on the lowest rung of the social ladder. Even after
they migrate, most of them end up doing menial jobs
and their quality of life is much worse than what they
used to have in the rural setting. In order to address
these issues, the NIRD&PR should be renamed as
National Institute of Rurban Development and
Panchayati Raj, acknowledging the disappearing
borders of rural and urban in the country. Farmer is
no more a farmer as they are entering other vocations.
Other distressing features of agriculture are
feminisation and casualisation. It is the women who
are left behind to practise agriculture. They are
inadequately skilled and experienced in production
and marketing. They need to be skilled in the
agriculture and allied sectors so that their productivity
can be enhanced and thus their income and
livelihoods.

Youth aspirations and requirement of skills were also
discussed in this sector. It was noted that the
economy is opening new opportunities for a set of
skills called Green Skills.
Theme II: Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
NIRD&PR should focus on Skilling India. The role of
NIRD &PR as monitoring institution was appreciated
and it was stressed that it should become Strategic
Enabler and Thought Leader. We need to deepen our
engagement by monitoring inputs, infrastructure,
SOPs, etc., and attempt to develop a labour market
with focus on providing jobs. Further, NIRD’s role is
to measure the income in informal sector jobs and
impact on livelihoods and to develop a model. It
should also become labour market information
system manger, instead of focusing on the inputs in
skill development. It was further emphasised that the
Institution should become a 'Global Skills Factory'.
Keeping in view the importance of the life skills the
Institution should evolve a model to infuse the life
skills on a continuous basis. With the advent of
robotic technology, the skills such as tailoring,
welding, automobile repairing etc., are going to
disappear. Therefore, our effort in skill development
should be progressive and proactively scan the global
trends so as to position our skill development
initiatives appropriately to meet the future trends.
Otherwise, we will be creating skills which may not
be in demand in the future to come. It was suggested
that :
z

NIRD runs long term vocational courses
integrating them with academia and industry

z

Become market place for CSR offering
partnerships and collaborations

191

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

z

Offer Rural entrepreneurship

z

Create entrepreneurship models

Theme III: Technology and Innovations for creating
Wealth and Equity
It was emphasised that all technologies that are
relevant to Rural Development should be collected,
documented and disseminated. Demonstration of the
same should also take place. The three steps required
are Training, Handholding and Projectisation. A little
infusion of technology has taken place. Therefore,
mechanism for the same is to be created. This
information needs to be collected, compiled and
classified.
Theme IV: Water, Sanitation, Health and Nutrition
An overview about the issues around water and
sanitation in India was presented. It was
supplemented with ideas on the issues of water
quality and equity issue in rural areas. The model of
purification of water coordinated by a village
Panchayat was discussed.
Theme V: Financial Inclusion
Some studies show that 93 per cent of rural credit is
being done through money lenders and the rest by
institutional financing. However, it should be
reversed by adopting various methods. The
consequences of inadequate credit sources and their
impact on life of the farmers were discussed.
Theme VI: Social Justice, Equity and Gender
Mainstreaming
The discussions highlighted the issue of feminisation
of poverty, informal sector and the problem of wage
discrimination in various sectors. The McKinsey Study

192

wherein the role of women and their participation
has been discussed in detail with relation to GDP
growth was referred to. It was noted that caste and
gender discrimination still existed and that gender
budgeting and gender accounting were limited to
paper only. The issue of harassment of women by
Micro Finance Institutions came up for discussion. It
was felt that India’s position in Gender Empowerment
Index is very low and that it needs greater attention
immediately. Violence against women, including
domestic violence, low literacy levels, issues of
widows and destitute, non-registration of marriages,
migration, low sex ratios, low enrolment in secondary
levels, high dropout levels, etc. were touched upon.
It was suggested that by making SHGs stronger better
results can be achieved. Women are agents of change
and we need to provide them digital literacy and
involve them in Skill India programme. It was further
suggested that best practices should be recorded by
NIRD&PR even while offering larger number of tailormade programmes for PRIs.
Theme VII: Infrastructure (Roads, Housing, Marketing
Infrastructure and Value Creation)
This session started with Dr. A P J Abdul Kalam’s vision
on Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas
(PURA). Rural infrastructure should lead to physical
connectivity such as roads, electronic connectivity and
knowledge connectivity. All these connectivities
together lead to economic connectivity. Ministry of
Rural Development is keen on creating infrastructure
in the rural areas. The village population is increasing
consistently despite the migration and that
intellectual capital is depleting in the villages. There
is no systemised planning for developing the
infrastructure in rural areas. Therefore, training

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

programmes should lay greater emphasis on rural
infrastructure and sensitise the officers at various
levels in the domain of infrastructure.

Theme VIII: Institutions (Human Resource
Development, Capacity Building and Empowerment
of Panchayats, SHGs …)

It was stressed that NIRD&PR should take up a
research study to assess the impact of Bharat Nirman
programme on the lives of the rural people. The
logistic management, the value added services
linked to local areas, supply chain management and
transportation system required in the field of
agriculture were also highlited. It was proposed that
NIRD&PR to take up a study on the functioning of
cold storage and warehouses and how farmers are
being benefited by these warehouses. These studies
can also be done in collaboration with other
institutions.

The discussion highlighted the various dimensions
and the issues involved vis-à-vis the role of NIRDPR.
NIRD&Pr should think of how to empower the
communities and what capacities need to be built
and what kind of methodologies should be used for
the same. NIRD&PR needs to visualise up to what
level it can go for capacity building and also as to who
will take care of the next level. It should do capacity
building of people’s institutions like the Panchayati
Raj Institutions. The Institute has to decide on what
kind of programmes it will do and work out the
accountability factors for the outcome in the
discussion that follow, the priority in institution
building and role of NIRD&PR and other institution
were examined.

193

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE- XV

Faculty Publications

Books

Journal

1.

The New Rural Paradigm: Policies and
Governance, published by National Institute of
Rural Development & Panchayati Raj,
Hyderabad, Jan 2017 by Dr. Gyanmudra (ISBN
978-93-84503-72-7).

1.

2.

Rural Sanitation in India: Achievements, Trends
and Challenges, published by National
Institute of Rural Development & Panchayati
Raj, Hyderabad, 2016 by Dr. P SivaRam, R
Ramesh, Dr. Y Gangi Reddy. (ISBN-978-93-8450356-7).

Dr. Ch.Radhika Rani, Dr. Raj Kumar P and Shri
Phaneendra Kumar “Impact of Watershed
programme on Nutritional Security : Evidences
from the Field”, published in International
Journal of Rural Management, Vol 13,No 1, 2017
(ISSN : 0973 – 0680).

2.

Dr.A.Amarender Reddy and Dr.Ch.Radhika Rani,
“Towards Sustainable Indicators of Food and
Nutritional Security”, published in World
Journal of Science Technology and Sustainable
Development, Vol 13, No 2,2016(ISSN : 2024
5945).

3.

Dr. R Ramesh, “Community-based Financing
Mechanism for Rural Water Supply in Tamil
Nadu, India”, APJORD, published in Asia-Pacific
Journal of Rural Development, Vol.XXVI, July
2016, No.1 (ISSN:1018-5291).

4.

Dr. R Ramesh, “Rural Development Trends:
Historical and the Prevailing”, published in
Journal of Extension and Research Vol.XVI,
No.2. July 2016 (ISSN:0972-351X).

5.

Dr. R Ramesh, “Value Chain Approach to
Handmade Paper Industry in India”, published
in Sedme: Small Enterprises Development,
Management & Extension Journal, Vol 4, No.2,
June 2016 (ISBN : 0970-8464).

6.

Dr. Siddayya, “Risk, Vulnerability and Coping
Mechanisms in Agriculture – A Study in
Telangana”, published in Indian journal of
Economics and Development, Volume 12
No.1a: 291-297, April 2016 (ISSN 2277-5412).

3.

4.

Arsenic in Drinking Water – A Case Study in Rural
Bangladesh, published by Centre on integrated
Rural Development for Asia and Pacific
(CIRDAP), Dhaka, Bangladesh, 2016 by Dr. P
SivaRam (ISBN : 9848104755).
Role of Technologies & Emerging Gender
Relations in SHGs, published by National
Institute of Rural Development & Panchayati
Raj, Hyderabad by Dr. Valentina (ISBN
9789384503734).

5.

Water Resource Development Plans, published
by Vrinda Publishing House, 2016 by Dr. V
Madhava Rao, Shri T Phanindra Kumar, Shri DSR
Murthy, Dr. P Kesava Rao, Dr P Raj Kumar, Shri H
K Solanki (ISBN 978-81-932824-0-3).

6.

Geo-Informatics Applications in Natural
Resource Management, published by
Professional books publishers by Dr. Raj Kumar
Pammi 2016 (978-93-85506-06-2).

194

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

7.

Dr. Siddayya, “Economics of Pesticide Usage in
Vegetables Production in Western Uttar
Pradesh,” published in Ecology, Environment
and Conservation Paper, Vol. 22,; Page No.403410, April Suppl. Issue 2016 (ISSN 0971-765X).

13.

Dr. (Ms.) Aruna Jayamani, “Self-help Groups
(SHGs) in Kolar Town of Karnataka: Case Study”
published in Journal for Studies in Management
and Planning, Volume 02, Issue 12, December
2016 (ISSN: 2395-0463).

8.

Dr. Siddayya, “A Study on Preferred Quality
Traits in Marketing and Consumption of Pigeon
Pea in Karnataka State,” published in Ecology,
Environment and Conservation Paper, Vol.
22,Page No. 411-414, April Suppl. Issue 2016
(ISSN 0971-765X)

14.

Dr. P KesavaRao “Web GIS based Information
System for Rural Development,” published in
International Journal of Science and Research,
Page No. 2469-2475, 2016 (ISSN: 2319-7064).

15.

Dr. P Kesava Rao, “Development of a Spatial
Decision Support System for Milli Watershed
Management in Zaheerabad, that Combines
Volunteered GIS System with Cloud Mobile
Data Collection,” published in International
Journal of Applied Engineering Research, Page
No. 6607-6612, 2016 (ISSN 0973-4562).

16.

Dr. P Kesava Rao, “Identification of Urban Sprawl
– A Case Study of Vijayawada City, Andhra
Pradesh, India”published in International
Journal of Lowland Technology International,
Page No. 59-6, 2016 (ISSN 1344-9656).

17.

Dr. T. V ijaya Kumar and Dr. N. Deepa,
“Educational Management Information
System: Post Enumeration Survey of U-DISE In
Telangana", published in International Journal
of Education And Research Journal, Page 47-52,
Vol.2, Issue, 10, October 2016 (ISSN 2454-9916).

18.

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar and Dr. V. Lalitha, “Women
Empowerment Through Self-Help Groups
(SHG’s): A Study of Siripuram V illage In
Telangana State,” published in Social Sciences
International Research Journal, Vol.2.Special
Issue, 2016 (ISSN No. 2395-0544).

9.

10.

11.

12.

Dr. Siddayya, “Assessment of Determinants for
Livestock Holding Pattern in North-Eastern Dry
Zone of Karnataka,” published in Indian Journal
of Dryland Agricultural Research &
Development 31 (1) : 15-24, 2016 (ISSN 09712062).
Dr. G V Raju, “Sea Safety on Traditional Fishing
Crafts along Andhra Pradesh Coast,” published
in Journal of International Fisheries and Aquatic
Studies, Vol 4(3), Page No 204-214, April 2016
(ISSN: 2347-5129).
Dr. G V Raju, “Impact of Motorisation of Fishing
Craft on Socio-economic Status of the
Traditional Fisherman of Andhra Pradesh
Coast,” published in Journal of Fisheries
Economics and Development, Vol. XVIII,June,
2016 (ISSN: 2249-1074).
Dr. (Ms.) Aruna Jayamani, “Livelihood Options
of Social Stigma of PLWHA in Andhra Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra,” published in
International Journal of Management and
Development Studies, Volume 5 Number 3 July 2016 (ISSN 2321-1423).

195

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

19.

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar and Dr. N. Deepa, “MIS in
Elementary Education: A Qualitative Check
Study of U-DISE in Andhra Pradesh,” published
in International Journal of Education And
Research Journal, Vol.2, Issue,11,
November,2016 (ISSN 2454-9916).

20.

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar and Dr. V. Lalitha, “Farm
Management In Rural Areas: Role Of Women In
Decision-Making Process,” published in Social
Sciences International Research Journal
Vol.2.Special Issue, 2016 (ISSN No. 2395-0544).

21.

Dr. T. V ijaya Kumar and Dr. V. Lalitha,
“Occupational Stress among Rural Secondary
School Headmasters – A Case Study of Zilla
Parishad Secondary Schools in Telangana
State,” published in Asian Academic Journal
Science and Humanities, Page 142-149, Vol.3,
Issue. I, November 2016 (ISSN 2278-859X).

3.

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar and Dr. Sonal Mobar Roy,
“Tribal Health Initiative- A Case Study on Mobile
Health Unit In Odisha: Mobile Health, Tele
medicine(E-health infrastructure),and Health
Communication” in Book titled Health and
Development-Issues and Challenges,
Bloomsbury Pvt.ltd, New Delhi,2016 (ISBN
No.978-93-85936-21-0).

4.

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar and Dr. V. Lalitha, “Corporate
Social Responsibility and Healthcare Initiatives
: A Case Study of Arogya Express,” in book titled
Developing Competencies and Skills for Global
Competitiveness, Excel India Publishers,
January 2017, Pg. No. 29-34 (ISBN: 978-93-8625637-9).

5.

Dr. V. Suresh Babu and Obi Reddy et al. “Impact
of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS on Land Use Pattern
and Natural Resource Management in Drought
Prone Rayalaseema Region of Andhra Pradesh,
India,” in a Book titled Sustainable Management
of Land Resources – An Indian Perspective,
Published by Apple Academic Press Inc., 3333,
Mistwell Crescent, Oakville, ON L61, 0A2
Canada & 9, Spinnaker Way, Waretown,
NJ08758, USA, 2016 (ISBN: 978-1-77188-517-1).

6.

Dr. V. Suresh Babu and Dr. M.V. Rao, et al.
“Integrated Land Use Planning for Sustainable
Agriculture and Rural Development,” published
in a Book titled Integrated Land Use Planning
for Sustainable Agriculture and Rural
Development, published by Apple Academic
Press Inc., 3333, Mistwell Crescent, Oakville,
ON L61, 0A2 Canada & 9, Spinnaker Way,
Waretown, NJ08758, USA, 2016 (ISBN: 978-177188-104-3)

Book Chapter
1.

2.

196

Dr. R Ramesh, “Unnat Bharat AbhiyanCommunity Engagement by Institutions of
Higher Learning, Best Practices in Rural
Development (UGC & NABARD funded seminar
collection)” published by Shanlax Publications,
Tamil Nadu, Edited by Prof. M P Boraian, July
2016 (ISBN : 978-93-85977-85-5).
Dr. P SivaRam, “Best Practices in Rural
Development- A Case Study of Roof Top
Rainwater Harvesting in Mizorarm State (UGC
& NABARD funded seminar collection),”
published by Shanlax Publications, Tamil Nadu,
Edited by Prof. M P Boraian, July 2016 (ISBN :
978-93-85977-85-5).

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

7.

Dr V Madhava Rao, “GIS and Satellite Remote
Sensing in Irrigation System” Vrinda Publishing
House, Page 71-81, 2016 (ISBN:978-81-9328240-3).

Reports
1.

2.

Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY)
Performance Progress Report Volume – I, Sep
2016, published by National Institute of Rural
Development & Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad
(ISBN 978-93-84503-66-6).
Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY)
Performance Progress Report Volume – II,Sep
2016,published by National Institute of Rural
Development & Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad
(ISBN 978-93-84503-67-3).

3.

Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) National
Overview of Performance Progress Report, Sep
2016,published by National Institute of Rural
Development & Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad
(ISBN 978-93-84503-65-9).

Handbooks & IEC materials
¾

Handbook

z

Standard Operating Procedure for Swachh
Campus: Ten Steps to a Swachh Campus.

¾

IEC Materials

z

Dos and Don’ts on Waste Management.

z

Composting: Frequently Asked Questions.

z

Waste Management and Behaviour Change
Communication.

197

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

NERC Research Studies Completed: 2016-17
S. No.

Title of the Study

ANNEXURE- XVI
Teamor/ Team

Sponsoring Agency

A. Consultancy Studies
1

Application of Traditional Knowledge in
Farming Sector: A Case Study of Organic
Farming in Assam from Field to Market

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. Ratna Bhuyan

Task Force, DST
Network Programme
on Traditional
Knowledge Systems in
the Indian Himalayan
Region, JNU, New
Delhi

2

Evaluation of Work Phase for Batch-II of IWMP
Projects (19) in Nagaland

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. NSR Prasad
Shri A. Simhachalam

SLNA, IWMP, Nagaland

3

Evaluation of PMAGY in Five Villages of
Morigaon District, Assam

Dr. K. Haloi

Ministry of Social
Justice and
Empowerment

4

Promotion of Rural Livelihoods through
Effective Utilisation of Water Resources by
Adopting Advanced Pisciculture Practices in
Kathora Revenue Village of Nalbari District,
Assam

Dr. K. Haloi
Shri A. Simhachalam
Dr. NSR Prasad

NFDB, Hyderabad

B. Action Research
1

198

Promotion of Rural
Entrepreneurship and Enterprises through
Livelihoods Cluster Approach:
A Pilot Initiative in Action Research

Dr. K Haloi
Dr. Ratna Bhuyan

NIRD&PR, Hyderabad

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

NERC Studies on going: 2016-17
S. No.

Name of the Study

ANNEXURE- XVII
Team

A. NIRD&PR Studies
1

Generation of Geo-Database on Rural
Roads Compatible with C-DAC Specifications and
Data Standards : A Case of Dakshin Bholagaon
Panchayat of Rani C & RD Block, Kamrup District,
Assam

Dr. NSR Prasad
Shri A. Simhachalam
Dr. K. Haloi

2

A Case Study of Integrated Planning under
Autonomous District Councils (ADCs) of Manipur

Dr. M. K. Shrivastava

3

A Case Study on Communitisation of Rural
Development and Public Services in Nagaland

Dr. M. K. Shrivastava

4

Traditional Knowledge in Organic Farming:
A Study of Assam

5

Horticulture for Livelihood: A Study of Dirang
Thembang Circles of West Kameng District of
Arunachal Pradesh

6

Decentralised Good Governance: A Success
Story of two Gram Panchayats in Sikkim

Dr. R.M. Pant,
Dr. Ratna Bhuyan

7

Traditional Rural Handicraft Activities: A Case
Study of Mask Making in Majuli and Bell and Brass
Metal Works in Sarthebari, Assam

Dr. Ratna Bhuyan
Dr. R.M. Pant

8

Successful Women Micro Entrepreneurs from
Rural Areas of Assam

Dr. Ratna Bhuyan
Dr. R.M. Pant

Dr. R M Pant
Dr. Ratna Bhuyan
Dr. R.M. Pant,
Dr. N.D. Singh,
Dr. Ratna Bhuyan and
Programme Coordinator
(KVK), Dirang

199

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

B. Consultancy Studies in Progress
S. No.

Name of the Research Project

Project Director/
Team

Sponsoring
Agency

Dr. K. Haloi

Dir. Welfare of
Scheduled
Castes, Assam

1

Conduct of Baseline Survey and Preparation
of VDP in 75 PMAGY Villages of Assam

2

Final/ End Term Evaluation of 10 Batch I (2009-10)
IWMP Projects, Tripura

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. NSR Prasad
Shri A. Simhachalam

SLNA, IWMP,
Tripura

3

Evaluation of the Consolidation Phase for Batch-II
of IWMP Projects (19) in Nagaland

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. NSR Prasad
Shri A. Simhachalam

SLNA, IWMP,
Nagaland

4

Generation, Mapping and Web Publishing of
Geo-database on Shifting Cultivation by Rotation
Cycle Using Geo-spatial Technologies: A Study of
Seven Districts of NE India

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. NSR Prasad
Shri A. Simhachalam

NEC, Shillong

5

Impact of Rural Road Connectivity Initiatives on the
Socio-economic Sphere in Jorhat District

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. NSR Prasad
Shri A. Simhachalam

Dept. of P & RD,
Govt. of Assam

200

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

ANNEXURE- XVIII

NERC Faculty Publications : 2016-17

Books
S. No.

Name of the book

Name of the
Publisher/ ISBN No.

Author (s)

1

Traditional Knowledge
in Organic Farming

Akansha Publishing
House, 4649-B/21, Ansari
Road, Darya Ganj,
New Delhi - 110002/
ISBN 978 81 8370 4762

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. Ratna Bhuyan

2

Development Perspectives in North
East India: A Holistic Overview

Akansha Publishing House ,
New Delhi ISBN-978-81-8370461-8

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. M K Shrivastava

Papers/Articles Published
S. No.

Title of the Paper/ Article

Name of the Journal/Newspaper/
Book/ ISBN No.

Author (s)

1

Web GIS Based Information System for International Journal of Science and
Rural Development
Research (IJSR), Volume 5, Issue 5,
May 2016 ISSN No: 2319-7064

Shri A Simhachalam
Dr. NSR Prasad

2

Usage of mSBM Application under Rural Sanitation in India :
Swachh Bharat Mission in North East Achievements,
Trends
and
India – Status and Issues
Challenges-NIRD&PR Publication May
2016 ISBN No: 978-93-84503-56-7

Dr. NSR Prasad
Shri A Simhachalam
Dr. K. Haloi

3

Performance of Consolidation Phase Development Perspectives in North
Activities of IWMP Project: A Case of East India: A Holistic Overview By
Longleng District, Project-I, Nagaland Akansha Publishing House
ISBN No: 978-81-8370-461-8

Dr. NSR Prasad
Shri A Simhachalam
Dr. K. Haloi

4

Land Requisition and Acquisition in
the State of Assam: Laws, Practices
and their Implications on Land
Security of Tribals

Dr. M K Shrivastava

The Oriental Anthropologist,
January 2017 (a peer reviewed IBSS
listed International Journal)
ISSN:0972-558X; e-ISSN:0976-3430

(Contd...)

201

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Title of the Paper/ Article

Name of the Journal/Newspaper/
Book/ ISBN No.

Author (s)

5

Constitutional and Legal Frame of Published in Book Titled
Decentralisation and Self-Governance Development Perspectives in North
in North East States and Its Implication East India: A Holistic Overview
Edited by Dr. R. M. Pant & Dr. M.K
Shrivastava Akanksha Publishing
House, New Delhi.
(ISBN-978-81-8370-461-8)

Dr. M K Shrivastava

6

Cleanliness is Unique Selling Published in ‘Rural Sanitation in
Proposition (USP): A Case of India: Achievements, Trends and
Mawlynnong in Meghalaya
Challenges Edited by P.SivaRam, R
Ramesh and Y.Gangi Reddy, NIRD
&PR, Hyderabad(ISBN-978-9384503-56-7)

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. M K Shrivastava

202

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Members of General Council
S. No.

Name

S. No.

ANNEXURE-XIX

Name

1. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar,
Hon’ble Union Minister for Rural Development,
Department of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

8. Additional Secretary,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Department of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001

2. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav,
Hon’ble Union Minister of State for
Rural Development,
Department of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001

9. Joint Secretary (Trg.)
Ministry of Rural Development
Department of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001

3. Shri Amarjeet Sinha, IAS,
Secretary,
Department of Rural Development
Ministry of Rural Development
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.
4. Chief Executive,
National Co-operative Union of India
3, Siri Institutional Area,
August Kranti Marg (Khel Goan Marg)
New Delhi - 110 001.

10. Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Department of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001
11. Secretary,
Department of Agriculture,
Ministry of Agriculture,
Government of India,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001

5. Chairman,
University Grants Commission,
UGC Building,
Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi - 110 001

12. Secretary,
Ministry of Human Resource Development
Department of Higher Education
Government of India
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001

6. President of
Association of Indian Universities,
AIU House,
16 Comrade Indrajit Gupta Marg
(Kotla Marg),
New Delhi -110002

13. Joint Secretary,
Department of Personnel and Training,
Room No.304, 3rd Floor,
Block IV, Old JNU Campus,
New Mehrauli Road,
New Delhi - 110 067

7. Secretary,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation,
Room No.247, ‘A’ Wing,
Nirman Bhawan,
New Delhi-110001

14. Advisor ( Rural Development),
Planning Commission,
Room No. 232, Yojana Bhavan,
Sansad Marg,
New Delhi - 110 001

203

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S. No.

Name

S. No.

Name

15. Principal Secretary,
Rural Development &P.R.Department,
Government of Assam,
Dispur, Guwahati - 781037
Assam

19. Secretary,
Rural Development Department,
Government of Bihar,
Main Secretariat,
Patna - 800 015

16. Principal Secretary,
Rural Development Department,
Government of Kerala,
Thiruvananthapuram - 695001
Kerala

20. Vice-Chancellor,
Mohan Lal Sukhadia University,
Udaipur- 313 001.
Rajasthan

17. Secretary,
Panchayati Raj and Rural Development,
Government of West Bengal,
Jessop Building,
1st Floor,63, N.S.Road
Kolkata - 700 001
18. Secretary,
Rural Development & Panchayati Raj,
Government of Maharashtra,
Mantralaya,
Mumbai - 400 032

204

21. Vice-Chancellor,
Indira Gandhi National Open
University (IGNOU)
Maidan Garhi,
New Delhi - 110 067
22. Vice-Chancellor,
Bharathiar University,
Coimbatore. - 641 046.
(Tamil Nadu)
23. Dr. W.R.Reddy, IAS,
Director General
NIRD&PR, Rajendranagar,
Hyderabad - 500 030

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Annexure-XX

Members of the Executive Council
S. No.

Name

1.

Shri Amarjeet Sinha, IAS
Secretary,
Department of Rural Development,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110001

2.

Secretary,
Department of Panchayati Raj,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj,
Krishi Bhavan,
Dr. Rajendra Prasad Road,
New Delhi – 110001
Secretary,
Department of Land Resources,
Government of India,
12G, Nirman Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110011

3.

4.

Secretary,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
Room No.247, ‘A’ Wing, NirmanBhavan,
New Delhi - 110011

S. No.

Name

5.

Joint Secretary (Training)
Department of Personnel and Training,
3rd Floor, Block-IV, Old JNU Campus,
New Mehrauli Road,
New Delhi

6.

Additional Secretary,
Department of Rural Development,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110001

7.

Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor,
Department of Rural Development,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110001

8.

Dr. W. R. Reddy, IAS
Director General,
NIRD&PR, Rajendranagar,
Hyderabad - 500030

205

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Annexure-XXI

Members of the Academic Committee
S. No.

Name

1.

Dr.W.R. Reddy, IAS
Director General,
NIRD&PR, Hyderabad.

-

Ex-officio

2.

Joint Secretary (Trg)
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi.

-

Ex-officio

3.

Deputy Director General,
NIRD&PR, Hyderabad.

-

Ex-officio

4.

Director (FM) & (FA),
NIRD&PR, Hyderabad.

-

Ex-officip

206

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Annexure-XXII

NIRD&PR FACULTY AND OFFICERS AS ON 31-3-2017

Dr. W.R. Reddy, IAS, Director General
Ms. Chanda Pandit, IA&AS, Advisor (FM) & Registrar & Director (Admn)I/c

Schoolof Development Studies &
Social Justice
Centre for Agrarian Studies
(CAS)
Dr. (Ms.) Ch. Radhika Rani, Associate Professor
& Head i/c

Centre for Equity and Social Development
(CESD)
Dr. (Ms.) G. Valentina, Associate Professor &
Head i/c

Centre for Gender Studies and Development
(CGSD)
Dr. C S Singhal, Professor & Head
Dr. (Ms) N.V Madhuri, Associate Professor
Dr. (Ms) Sucharita Pujari, Assistant Professor

Centre for Human Resource Development
(CHRD)
Dr. (Ms) Gyanmudra, Professor & Head
Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar, Associate Professor
Dr. Lakhan Singh, Assistant Professor

Centre for Post Graduate Studies &
Distance Education
(CPGS & DE)
Dr. C.S. Singhal, Professor & Head I/c
Dr. A. Debapriya, Associate Professor
Dr. (Ms) Sonal Mobar Roy, Assistant Professor

School of Rural Livelihoods
Centre for Wage Employment
(CWE)
Dr. G. Rajani Kanth, Associate Professor & Head, I/c
Dr. (Ms.) P. Anuradha, Assistant Professor

Centre for Rural Infrastructure
(CRI)
Dr. P. SivaRam, Professor & Head
Dr. R. Ramesh, Assistant Professor

Centre for Livelihoods
(CFL)
Dr. P. SivaRam, Professor & Head i/c
Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar, Associate Professor
Dr. G.V. Krishna Lohi Das, Assistant Professor
Dr. P. Raj Kumar, Assistant Professor

207

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

School of Sustainable Development

School of Local Governance

Centre for Natural Resource Management
(CNRM)

Centre for Panchayati Raj
(CPR)

Dr. Siddayya, Associate Professor & Head I/c

Centre for Climate Change and Disaster
Management
(CCC&DM)
Dr. E.V Prakash Rao, Professor & Head
Dr. V. Suresh Babu, Associate Professor

School of Public Policy & Good
Governance

Dr. (Smt.). K. Jayalakshmi, Professor & Head
Dr. S Nagabhushan Rao, Associate Professor
Dr. (Ms). Pratyusna Patnaik, Assistant Professor

Centre for Decentralised Planning
(CDP)
Dr. Y. Bhaskara Rao, Professor & Head
Dr. R. Chinnadurai, Associate Professor

Centre for Social Audit
(CSA)

Centre for Planning, Monitoring and
Evaluation
(CPME)

Dr. (Ms.) C. Dheeraja, Associate Professor &
Head I/c

Dr. G. Venkata Raju, Associate Professor & Head I/c
Dr. (Ms.) Aruna Jayamani, Assistant Professor

School of Science, Technology and
Knowledge System

Centre for CSR, Public Private Partnership &
People’s Action
(CC, PPA & PA)

Centre for Geo-Informatics Applications in
Rural Development
(C-GARD)

Dr. R. Murugesan, Professor & Head

Centre for Good Governance &
Policy Analysis
(CGG&PA)
Dr. (Ms.) M. Sarumathy, Associate Professor &
Head I/c
Dr. K. Prabhakar, Assistant Professor

Dr. V. Madhava Rao, Advisor & Head i/c
Dr. P. Kesava Rao, Associate Professor
Shri D.S.R Murthy, Assistant Professor
Shri H.K Solanki, Assistant Professor
Shri T Phanindra Kumar, Assistant Professor
Shri K Rajeshwar, Computer Programming Associate

Centre for Innovations & Appropriate
Technologies (CIAT)
Dr. Y. Gangi Reddy, Professor & Head

208

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Professional Support Centres
Centre for Development Documentation &
Communication
(CDC)
Dr. (Ms.) Gyanmudra, Professor & Head i/c
Dr. (Ms.) K. Papamma, Editor
Dr. (Ms.) M. Padmaja, Senior Librarian

Centre for Information & Communication
Technology
(CICT)
Shri G.V Satyanarayana, Assistant Professor
(Sr.Scale)
Dr. Partha Prathim Bhattacharjee,
Assistant professor

Centre for Research and Training
Coordination & Networking
(CRTCN)
Dr. R.P Achari, Associate Professor (Training) &
Head I/c

Project Directors
Dr. K P Rao, Project Director, NRLM Cell
Shri O.N. Bansal, Project Director, RSETI

Administration
Dr. A Debapriya, Assistant Registrar (T) I/c.
Shri A. Praveen Kumar, Assistant Registrar (E)
Shri M Ramakrishna Reddy, PS to DG
Shri N M Naik, Officer on Special Duty (OSD)

Shri M Nagendra Rao, Section Officer (B)
Shri C. Ramaswamy, Section Officer (C)
Smt. P. Dhanalakshmi, Section Officer (D)
Smt. Dorcas Mildred, Section Officer
Shri K.C Behera, Public Relations Officer
Shri Asrarul Haque, Hostel Manager

Accounts
Shri K. Janardhana Rao AFA & PAO
Shri G.V Sridhar Goud, Accounts Officer
Ms. K.R Ashalatha, Accounts Officer
Shri V. Satish, Accounts Officer

Health Centre
Dr. (Ms) Sarah Mathews, Lady Medical Officer

Hindi Section
Ms. Anita Pandey, Assistant Director (OL)
Shri E. Ramesh, Senior Hindi Translator

Maintenance Unit
Shri P.V. Dayanand, Executive Engineer

NIRD&PR-NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL
CENTRE, GUWAHATI, ASSAM
Dr. R.M Pant, Director
Dr. K. Haloi, Associate Professor
Dr. (Ms) RatnaBhuyan, Assistant Professor
Dr. Mukesh Kumar Srivastava, Assistant Professor
Dr. NSR Prasad, Assistant Professor
Dr. A Simhachalam, Adjunct Faculty
Shri Arup Jyoti Sarma, Administrative Officer
Shri B.N. Sarma, Accounts Officer

209

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

Annexure-XXIII

Faculty Development Programmes Attended by Faculty and Non-faculty Members:
2016-17

A. Academic
International
S.No.

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/ Conference /Training
Programme

1

Dr. Pratyusna Patnaik
Assistant Professor (CPR)

Attended the Visit India Observatory at the
London School of Economics, London.

2

Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar
Associate Professor (CFL)

Attended the Regional workshop on Sufficiency
Economy Philosophy and One Tambon One
Product (OTOP) to CIRDAP Member Countries at
Bangkok and Ayutthaya Province, Thailand during
May 8-12, 2016.

3

Dr. G. Valentina
Associate Professor (CESD)

Attended the Workshop on Sustainable
Community Development and Saemaul Undong,
at Seoul, Republic of Korea during June 27-July
3, 2016

4

Dr. Sonal Mobar Roy
Assistant Professor (CPGS&DE)

Attended the Eighth Asian Conference on
Education 2016 from October 20-23, 2016 at Kobe,
Japan.

5

Dr. V. Madhava Rao
Advisor & Head (CGARD)

V isited CIRDAP, Dhaka, Bangladesh during
January 20-25, 2017 in connection with the
Inauguration of GIS Centre at CIRDAP and
Training on GIS.

(Contd...)

210

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S.No

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/ Conference /Training
Programme

6

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Assistant Professor (CGARD)

V isited CIRDAP, Dhaka, Bangladesh during
January 20-25, 2017 in connection with the
Inauguration of GIS Centre at CIRDAP and
Training on GIS.

7

Dr. U Hemantha Kumar
Associate Professor (CFL)

Visited Afghanistan as Resource Persons to
conduct Classes and Second Semester End
Examinations of PGDSRD-8 Batch from 21-122016 to 30-12-2016 at Afghanistan Institute of
Rural Development (AIRD), Kabul, Afghanistan.

8

Dr. G V Krishna Lohi Das
Assistant Professor (CFL)

V isited Afghanistan as Resource Person to
conduct Classes and Second Semester End
Examinations of PGDSRD-8 Batch from 21-122016 to 30-12-2016 at Afghanistan Institute of
Rural Development (AIRD), Kabul, Afghanistan.

9

Dr. U Hemantha Kumar
Associate Professor (CFL)

Attended the Exposure Visit Programme on
Cooperative Business Model in Sri Lanka during
3 -6 January, 2017 at NICD, Polgolla, Sri Lanka.

10

Dr. N.V Madhuri
Associate Professor, CGS&D

Attended the Exposure Visit Programme on Cooperative Business Model in Sri Lanka during 3 6 January, 2017 at NICD, Polgolla, Sri Lanka.

211

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

National (Academic)
S.No

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/ Conference /Training
Programme

1

Dr. C.S. Singhal
Professor & Head, CGS&D

Attended the Programme on Initiatives of
Change (IofC), Panchgani, during June 13-16, 2016.

2

Dr. M. Sarumathy
Associate Professor & Head I/c, CGG&PA

Attended the Programme on Initiatives of
Change (IofC), Panchgani, during June 13-16, 2016.

3

Dr. N.V Madhuri
Associate Professor, CGS&D

Attended the Programme on Initiatives of
Change (IofC), Panchgani, during June 13-16, 2016.

4

Dr. U.Hemantha Kumar
Associate Professor, CFL

Attended the Programme on Initiatives of
Change (IofC), Panchgani, during June 13-16, 2016.

5

Dr. P. Anuradha
Assistant Professor, CWE

Attended the Programme on Initiatives of
Change (IofC), Panchgani, during June 13-16, 2016.

6

Dr. Lakhan Singh
Assistant Professor (CHRD)

Attended the Three-day National Workshop on
Qualitative Research Methodology at Tata
Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai during July
28-30, 2016.

7

Dr. R .Murugesan
Professor & Head (CC, PPP& PA)

Attended the National HRD Network 3 CSR
Summit CSR: Strategising for Sustainable
Development during August 11-12, 2016 at The
Ritz-Carlton, Bengaluru.

8

Dr. R .Murugesan
Professor& Head (CC, PPP& PA)

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune
duringSeptember 14-17, 2016.

9

Dr. Kanak Haloi
Professor, NERC Guwahati.

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune during
September 14-17, 2016.
(Contd...)

212

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S.No

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/ Conference /Training
Programme

10

Dr. R Ramesh
Assistant Professor (CRI)

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune during
September 14-17, 2016.

11

Dr. M.K Srivastava
Assistant Professor, NERC Guwahati

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune during
September 14-17, 2016.

12

Dr. A Debapriya
Associate Professor (CPGS&DE)

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune during
September 14-17, 2016.

13

Dr. T. Phanindra Kumar
Assistant Professor (C-GARD)

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune during
October 12-15, 2016.

14

Dr. N S R Prasad
Assistant Professor, NERC Guwahati

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune during
October 12-15, 2016.

15

Dr. M.K Srivastava
Assistant Professor, NERC Guwahati

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune during
October 12-15, 2016.

(Contd...)

213

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S.No

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/ Conference /Training
Programme

16

Dr. Pratyusna Patnaik
Assistant Professor (CPR)

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune during
November 23-26, 2016.

17

Dr. Siddayya
Associate Professor (CNRM)

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune during
November 23-26, 2016.

18

Dr. Ratna Bhuyan
Assistant Professor, NERC

Attended the Training Programme on Heart of
the Effective Leadership Programme organised
by ASIA Plateau, the International Centre for
Initiatives of Changes at Panchgani, Pune from
November 23-26, 2016.

19

Shri D S R Murthy
Assistant Professor (CGARD)

Attended the Two-day Workshop on Big Data
Analytics using R (December 16-17, 2016)
organised by JNTUHCEH & CSI SIG –BDA, at
Department of CSE, JNTUH, Kukatpally,
Hyderabad, Telangana.

20

Shri G V Satyanarayana
Assistant Professor (CICT)

Attended the Two-day Workshop on Big Data
Analytics using R (December 16-17, 2016)
organised by JNTUHCEH & CSI SIG –BDA, at
Department of CSE, JNTUH, Kukatpally,
Hyderabad, Telangana.

21

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Assistant Professor (C-GARD)

Attended the Two-day Workshop on Big Data
Analytics using R (December 16-17, 2016)
organised by JNTUHCEH & CSI SIG –BDA, at
Department of CSE, JNTUH, Kukatpally,
Hyderabad, Telangana.

214

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S.No

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/ Conference /Training
Programme

22

Shri K.Rajeshwar
Senior Programming Associate

Attended the Two-day Workshop on Big Data
Analytics using R (December 16-17, 2016)
organised by JNTUHCEH & CSI SIG –BDA, at
Department of CSE, JNTUH, Kukatpally,
Hyderabad, Telangana.

23

Shri T. Rama Krishna
Programmer

Attended the Two-Day Workshop on Big Data
Analytics using R (December 16-17, 2016)
organised by JNTUHCEH & CSI SIG –BDA, at
Department of CSE, JNTUH, Kukatpally,
Hyderabad, Telangana.

24

Dr. Lakhan Singh
Assistant Professor (CHRD)

Attended the ICIAHP-2016 2nd International
Conference of Indian Academy of Health
Psychology December 16-18, 2016 at Gautam
Buddha University at Greater Noida, Uttar
Pradesh.

25

Shri K M Rupesh
Young Professional (CIAT)

Attended Training Programme on New Practices
for Pucca Constraction by Treated Bamboo during
6-8 February, 2017 at FOSET, Howrah.

26

Dr. A Debapriya
AssociateProfessor (CPGS&DE)

Attended ICDE International Conference at the
Symbiosis Centre for Distance Learning, Pune
during 10th-11th March, 2017.

27

Dr. Sonal Mobar Roy
Assistant Professor (CPGS&DE)

Attended ICDE International Conference at the
Symbiosis Centre for Distance Learning, Pune
during 10 -11 March, 2017.

28

Dr. R. Ramesh
Assistant Professor (CRI)

Attended the Programme on Making Work for
the Poor (Market-Led Livelihood Interventions)
during February 22-24, 2017at Institute of Rural
Management, Anand.

(Contd...)

215

ANNUAL REPORT 2016-17

S.No
29

Name of the Faculty and Designation
Dr. N.V Madhuri
Associate Professor, CGS&D

Name of the Seminar/ Conference /Training
Programme
Attended the A Certificate Programme For All
Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) Members
on Prevention of Sexual Harassment at the
workplace by Ernst & Young LLP(EY) on 9 February,
2017 at New Delhi.

B. Non-Academic
S.No

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/ Conference /Training
Programme

1.

Shri Vishal Ganpat Naik
Assistant Registrar(T)

Attended the Special Programme on Pension and
other Retirement Benefits at Institute of
Secretariat Training & Management, (ISTM) New
Delhi during June 22-23, 2016.

2.

Shri A.Praveen Kumar
Assistant Registrar(E)

Attended the Course on Roster Writing and
Reservation in Service Govt. Policy for SCs, STs,
OBCs, and Physically Handicapped & Recruitment
Rules in Government Depts, Autonomous Bodies
& PSUs during November 24-26, 2016 at Hotel
Silver Rock, Mussoorie, Dehradun.

3.

Shri S K Ghousuddin
UDC (OL)

4.

Smt. Anita Pandey
Assistant Director (OL)

Attended the One-day Seminar on 13th January,
2017 at Rashtra Bhasha Nyaas , Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh.

5.

Smt. Anitha Pandey
Assistant Director (OL)

Attended One-day Seminar on Rajyabhasha
Sangoshthi Evam Samman Samaroh at Hotel
Katriya & Towers, Somajiguda, Hyderabad on 3
March, 2017.

6.

Shri Reddy Ramakrushna S.
Junior Hindi Translator (OL)

Attended the Five-day Computer Training
Programme for Government Officials during 1317 March, 2017 organised by Hindi Teaching
Scheme, Hyderabad.

216

Attended the Training Programme on Computers
during 26 -30 December, 2016.


