NNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNUAL REPORT
2015 - 16

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ
Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad - 500 030
INDIA

141

Photographs

:

P. Subrahmanyam

Cover Designed by :

V.G. Bhat

Printed by

M/s. VAISHNAVI LASER GRAPHICS, Hyderabad. Ph:040-27552178

:

CONTENTS

S.No.

Chapters

Pages

1

Overview

1

2

Training

9

3.

Research

34

4.

Action Research

39

5.

Consultancy Studies

43

6.

Networking with State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs)
and Extension Training Centres (ETCs)

47

7.

Documentation

52

8.

Information Dissemination

55

9.

Rural Technology Park

59

10.

Academic Programmes

75

11.

NIRD&PR- North – Eastern Regional Centre, Guwahati

81

12.

Administration

114

13.

Finance and Accounts

138

Annexures

141

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 1

OVERVIEW
National Institute of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR), an autonomous
organisation under the Ministry of Rural
Development, is a premier national centre of
excellence in rural development and Panchayati Raj.
It builds capacities of development functionaries,
elected representatives, and other stakeholders
through inter-related activities of training, research
and consultancy. Originally established as National
Institute of Community Development in 1958 at
Mussoorie, the Institute was shifted to its Hyderabad
Campus in 1965 and renamed as National Institute
of Rural Development in 1977. Recognising the need
for more focus on strengthening Panchayati Raj
system and Capacity building of PRI functionaries,
as per the decision of the General Council of the
Institute, the name of NIRD was changed as National
Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj
(NIRD&PR) w.e.f December 4, 2013. The Institute is
located in the serene rural surroundings of
Rajendranagar in a campus extending 174.21 acres
about 15 km away from the historic city of

Hyderabad. The NIRD&PR celebrated its golden
jubilee year of establishment in 2008. It aims to:
i.

organise training programmes, conferences,
seminars and workshops for senior
level development managers, elected
representatives, bankers, NGOs and other
stakeholders

ii.

undertake, aid, promote and coordinate
research

iii.

study functioning of the Panchayati Raj
Institutions and rural development
programmes across the States

iv.

analyse and propose solutions to problems in
planning and implementation of the
programmes for rural development and

v.

develop content and disseminate information
through periodicals, reports, e-modules and
other publications

1

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

The Institute has the mandate to facilitate
development of rural poor and enhance their quality
of life. Considering the huge and varied challenges
faced in the development of rural poor across the
country, NIRD&PR as an apex Institute has to address
the training and capacity development needs of a
large clientele. Training of development functionaries
and elected representatives is a pre-condition in the
entire rural development process to make the policy
formulation and programme implementation
effective. The Institute acts as a "think-tank" of
Ministry of Rural Development and undertakes
training and research including action research on
various flagship programmes of the Ministry. The
Institute's services are also available to other
Ministries / Departments of the Central and State
Governments, banking institutions, public and
private sector organisations, civil societies,
Panchayati Raj Institutions and other national and
international agencies connected with rural
development. In more than 50 years of its existence,
NIRD&PR has been playing its own modest but
credible role to facilitate qualitative changes in
programme management through a process of
training, research, action research, consultancy,
information dissemination and information building.
This has enabled the Institute to emerge as the
National Apex Institute in the area of rural
development and Panchayati Raj. Established in 1983
at Guwahati, North-Eastern Regional Centre (NERC)
of NIRD&PR is recognised as a premier organisation
in the field of rural development catering to the
capacity building needs of development
functionaries of the region. During 33 years of its
existence, NERC has developed expertise and
experience in serving the specific training and
research needs of the north-eastern region.

2

Activities of the Institute
Training
The Institute has been organising training
programmes, workshops, seminars, etc., on themes
relating to rural development and Panchayati Raj.
NIRD&PR has expertise and good infrastructure to
train senior and middle level development
functionaries engaged in policy formulation,
management and implementation of rural
development programmes. The focus of these
programmes is on the modalities and mechanisms
of programme management with special reference
to process aspects which will help the developmental
professionals to achieve the expected goals and
objectives of the initiatives. The training programmes
are intended to create knowledge base, develop skills
and infuse right attitudes and values. The Institute
has been enlarging its canvas of training activities
every year in sustained manner and also has been
successful in making them more need based and
focused. The Institute could achieve a very high rate
of satisfaction of participants by evolving and
adopting new training methods and techniques on
continuous basis. Besides, the findings of the
research studies and action research are utilised in
training programmes as training inputs.
The Institute has been able to increase the number
of training programmes over the years on sustained
basis. There has been a significant increase in the
number of outreach programmes. Further, the
Institute has been endeavouring to share its
expertise and experience through international
training programmes for the professionals of
developing countries for promoting sustainable rural
development.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

The data for the last four years are given below:

By organising 1326 programmes, a total of 38424
participants were trained in 2015-16 as against 34722
persons trained in 1286 programmes during the
corresponding period of previous year. During 201516, NIRD&PR organised several workshops, seminars,
symposiums and national consultations and the
deliberations of these were published as reports and
books. Some of these include Flagship Programmes:
Solid Waste Management under SBA, Initiatives to
Natural Disasters in India : The New Rural Paradigm:
Policies and Governance, Policy Perspectives and
State Response to Agrarian Crisis and Farmers’
distress, Rural Sanitation in India: Achievements,
Trends and Challenges, A Road Map to Achieve

Disaster Resilience, Gender Budgeting for Rural
Development, Integrated Water Resource
Management: Issues and Options, Water Use
Efficiency, Equity through Participatory Irrigation
Management.
The Parliamentary Consultative Committee on Rural
Development, Panchayati Raj, Drinking Water and
Sanitation headed by the Honourable Cabinet
Minister of Ministry of Rural Development,
Panchayati Raj, Drinking Water and Sanitation, Shri
Chaudhary Birender Singh visited Hyderabad during
18- 19 November, 2015. The Committee comprised
Shri Sudarshan Bhagat, Hon’ble Minister of State for

3

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Rural Development, Shri Ram Kripal Yadav, Hon'ble
Minister of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Members
of Lok Sabha, Members of Rajya Sabha and Officials
from the Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry
of Panchayati Raj, Government of India.

Affairs, Government of India and others. It works in
close coordination with international organisations
like AARDO, CIRDAP, UN Women, etc.

Exposure Visits
Exposure visits for sharing Indian experiences has
also been part of the activities of the Institute over
the years. During the period under reference,
delegations from Mauritius, Nepal and Ghana visited
NIRD&PR.

Building the training capacities of its link institutions,
i.e. the State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs)
and Extension Training Centres (ETCs), is integral to
Institute's mandate. As part of it, 1004 off-campus /
regional and networking programmes were
organised at these institutions during the year. The
programmes mainly focused on flagship programmes
of the Ministry of Rural Development, Government
of India. The Institute is also serving the training
requirements of officials and non-officials of various
organisations and agencies including banks involved
in rural development. About 686 bank officials
belonging to Dena Bank, Syndicate Bank, Bank of
Maharashtra, Allahabad Bank, etc., were trained on
various aspects of rural credit management. Based
on requests received from Ministries and
Departments of Government of India and State
Governments, the Institute has undertaken training
programmes on themes required by them. The
Institute also organised 19 international training
programmes at the instance of Ministry of External

4

A high-level delegation consisting of Honourable
Minister and Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Social
Integration & Economic Empowerment, Government
of Republic of Mauritius visited the Institute during
the year. This was a part of Study Visits to India to
get an understanding of the Indian initiatives for
empowerment and social development of rural
people which will enable Government of Republic
of Mauritius to develop strategies on the same lines
for the vulnerable groups in the country. Shri Rajeev
Sadanandan, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Rural
Development, Government of India and Deputy
Director General i/c NIRD&PR briefed the delegates
on the activities of the Institute.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Research
Research forms an important component of the
perspective of NIRD&PR. As part of it, the Institute
examines and analyses the factors contributing to
improvement of social well-being of rural people
with focus on the rural poor and other disadvantaged
groups through research, action research and
consultancy. Research conducted by the Institute is
field-based in nature with emphasis on current rural
development issues. It helps to understand various
grassroots level issues pertaining to rural
development. It also assists in policy formulation for
rural development and forms an important input in
Institute’s training programmes. During the year, the
Institute conducted several research studies to
identify contemporary problems and issues
pertaining to programme implementation and to
suggest alternative strategies for improving
effectiveness of various programmes and schemes.
The direct approach to tackling development issues
related to the 'quality of life' of the rural poor has
been the focal area of research. The Ministry of Rural
Development places increased importance on the
feedback provided through the research studies
taken up by the Institute. During 2015-16, NIRD&PR
took up 32 research studies (research, action
research, village adoption and consultancy). Greater
emphasis was placed on organising regular Study
Forum meetings of faculty to discuss the research
study findings and finalise the research reports. The
Institute undertakes location-specific action research
in which a theme or a model is field tested, step-bystep, while actually implementing the project on the
ground. Day-to-day interventions are modified
according to the situation prevailing in the location.

The main focus is to evolve people-centered
approach in planning and implementation with local
decision making and participatory evaluation. It is in
fact a process of learning while doing. In order to
further strengthen the action research initiatives of
the Institute for effective implementation of rural
development and poverty alleviation programmes,
emphasis has been given on ‘village adoption’ studies
by adopting villages from the remote and backward
areas of different parts of the country. The Action
Research and Village Adoption studies enable
NIRD&PR faculty members to keep themselves
abreast with grassroots realities and development
challenges. NIRD&PR provides consultancy support
to various international and national organisations
on different development themes. The Institute also
takes up studies on the request of the Ministry of
Rural Development and other Central ministries and
Informatic Applications in Rural Development (CGARD) of the Institute designs specialised
programmes for imparting skills and improving
knowledge levels in the latest Geomatics technology
and tools. As approved by Government of India,
CGARD Centres are being established in five
countries of Africa viz., Kenya, Algeria, Niger,
Equatorial Guinea and Madagascar. Besides, the
process of establishing such Centres in SIRDs has
been initiated.

Rural Technology Park (RTP)
The Institute has established Rural Technology Park
(RTP) in 1999 to serve as a catalyst for accelerating
wide dissemination of appropriate and affordable
technologies to the rural poor. It aims at enhancing
their livelihoods for improving quality of life thereby

5

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

enabling them to move towards sustainable
development. The National Rural Building Centre at
RTP showcases cost-effective models of rural houses
with 40 different technologies, which are applicable
to different geographical regions of rural India. In
addition, Sanitation Park is also established with a
good number of models of individual hygienic toilets
which are affordable by the rural masses. RTP has
also obtained ISO 9001-2008. NIRD&PR is in the
process of establishing Rural Technology Parks in five
African countries, namely, Malawi, Zimbabwe,
Congo, Cote-de-Ivore and South Sudan in a phased
manner under India-Africa Forum Summit-II (IAFS)
of Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India.

Resource Cells
Resource Cells have been established at NIRD&PR
with a view to facilitating the special initiatives of
Ministry of Rural Development. These include Project
Cell on Rural Self-Employment Training Institutes
(RSETIs), National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM)
Resource Cell and Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen
Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) Cell.
The Scheme on RSETIs initiated by Ministry of Rural
Development aims at setting up of micro-enterprises
by the rural youth through skill development and
credit facilitation. The RSETI project cell of the
Institute is the nodal agency for infrastructure
creation for RSETIs in the States in collaboration with
banking organisations. As part of it, NIRD&PR is given
the responsibility of processing the proposals from
various sponsoring banks for release of the funds
provided by Ministry of Rural Development for
building infrastructure.

6

A Resource Cell for NRLM was established at
NIRD&PR with a view to facilitating capacity building
and research activities for promotion of rural
livelihoods. In order to create awareness and
exposure among officials at district, block and subblock level, the cell organised workshops, seminars
and sessions on concept, objectives, strategies,
framework and operationalisation of NRLM at
NIRD&PR and State Institutes of Rural Development
(SIRDs) and other institutions in different States.
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana
(DDU-GKY) is a skill training and placement
programme of the Ministry of Rural Development
with focus on rural poor youth. It is aimed at
sustainable employment through post-placement
tracking, retention and career progression. NIRD&PR
is one of the national level coordinating agencies for
appraisal and monitoring of the projects. It is
envisioned to play a central role in providing cofunding and implementation support to DDU-GKY in
the States and the Project Implementing Agencies
(PIAs) which implement the programme through skill
training and placement projects. At present,
NIRD&PR is monitoring 513 projects under which
142078 candidates were trained and of whom 62593
were placed.

Academic Programmes
The major on-going initiatives for rural development
have created demand for professionals. Keeping this
in view, NIRD&PR as a think-tank for rural
development came forward with management
education programme of one-year duration in 2008
in the form of Post Graduate Diploma in Rural

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Development Management (PGDRDM). The aim of
the programme is eventually to create a large pool
of professional programme delivery managers whose
induction is vital to the success of the rural
development programmes. All the students of the
PGDRDM batches completed so far have got
placement in various organisations. The tenth batch
of PGDRDM of 47 students including nine in-service
international candidates from CIRDAP and AARDO
member countries like Nigeria, Sudan, Vietnam,
Ghana, Indonesia, Iraq, Bangladesh, Myanmar and
Philippines started in August, 2015. The eleventh
batch of the programme commenced in January
2016.
In furtherance of the Institute's initiative for wider
outreach, a Distance Education Cell (DEC) was
established in the year 2010 and a one-year PG
Diploma in Sustainable Rural Development (PGDSRD)
was introduced. The seventh Batch commenced in
January, 2016 and 184 students were admitted. To
address the need for developing a well-trained set
of specialised tribal development professionals, the
Institute also started a one-year Post Graduate
Diploma Programme in Tribal Development
(PGDTDM) in distance mode in January, 2013. The
fifth batch of the programme commenced from
January, 2016 and 40 students were admitted.
Besides, Post Graduate Certificate Programme in
Geo-spatial Technology Application in Rural
Development (PGCGARD) was started in August,
2014. The second batch of the programme
commenced from August 2015 and 124 students
were admitted.

Special Initiatives
Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY)
The Institute has been envisaged to take up capacity
building programmes on Saansad Adarsh Gram
Yojana, which is on the priority of on-going rural
development initiatives. As part of it, NIRD&PR is
expected to organise orientation and other skill
development programmes for senior officials and to
develop training materials. In addition, as an apex
institute for rural development and Panchayati Raj,
it has to build the capacity and resources of State
Institutes of Rural Development and Extension
Training Centres. While orientation programmes for
State Nodal Officers, Resource Persons and Trainers
of SIRDs formed part of the last calendar, about 10
programmes on SAMARTHYA under SAGY were
conducted during 2015-16. Besides, modules and
materials were developed and translated in the
vernacular languages to facilitate capacity building
programmes of various target groups in the States.

Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM)
In the context of Swachh Bharat Mission, NIRD&PR
has taken initiatives to integrate activities related to
the Mission in its training and research perspective.
As part of these efforts, the Institute has initiated a
series of activities such as campus cleaning involving
employees and school children during 2014-15 and
the same were continued during the year under
reference. In addition, training programmes were
organised on themes relating to Swachh Bharat such
as Solid Waste Management, Development of IEC
materials, etc.

7

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Documentation and Information
Dissemination
NIRD&PR has a mandate to disseminate information
on rural development. The Institute continued its
efforts in publishing literature on rural development
issues during the year. As a leading publisher of rural
development literature in India, NIRD&PR
endeavours to share its research findings, observed
field realities and views on issues of current topical
importance with policy planners, academics and
others through its regular publications, occasional
papers, etc. The quarterly "Journal of Rural
Development" published by the Institute occupies a
place of pride among leading academic journals on
rural development and decentralised governance.
NIRD&PR Newsletter 'Pragati' in English and Hindi is
also published to provide wide publicity to training
programmes and also highlight various activities
undertaken by the Institute on a regular basis. The
Institute is also publishing a Quarterly Newsletter of
Rural Self-Employment Training Institutions (RSETIs)
“Enterprise”, covering news from various RSETIs
across the country. Additionally, the Institute brings
out more publications under research report series,
case study series and action research series. The
Institute houses a library with a rich collection of
1,16,277 books on rural development and allied
aspects. The library also subscribes to various online
databases relating to rural development and allied
aspects. The rural development database maintained
in the library consists of over two lakh references.

8

Administration and Finance
Administration and Finance wings of NIRD&PR
support and facilitate faculty members in
undertaking training, research and consultancy
activities of the Institute. The Institute’s policies and
strategies are determined by General Council.
Hon’ble Union Minister for Rural Development is the
President of the Council. The Management and
Administration of the Institute is vested in Executive
Council with Secretary, Rural Development as its
Chairman. The Director General is the CEO and is
responsible for Management of the Institute. The
Academic and Research Advisory Committees help
plan the training, research, action research and
consultancy and academic activities. As per the
decisions of the Alagh Committee on restructuring
of NIRD&PR, the Institute has been restructured into
six Schools and twenty five centres.
The Finance and Accounts Division of the Institute is
entrusted with the functions of Budgeting, Payment
& Accounting of funds, Preparation of Annual
Accounts, submission of audited annual accounts to
the Ministry in addition to rendering financial advice
on various matters relating to administration /
training / projects for decision making by the
Management. The Institute follows the double-entry
system with financial year beginning from 1st of April
and ending with 31st of March every year. The
Annual Accounts of the Institute are audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG). The
Accounts of the Institute are prepared duly adhering
to the prescribed norms approved by the CAG for
Central Autonomous Bodies. The Audit Report of
CAG on the Accounts of the Institute is incorporated
in the Annual Accounts every year and submitted to
the Parliament.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 2

TRAINING
Training plays a pivotal role in capacity building for
rural development and panchayati raj. NIRD&PR has
expertise and good infrastructure to train senior and
middle level development officials and elected
representatives of PRIs engaged in policy
formulation, management and implementation of
rural development programmes. The programmes
are intended to create knowledge base, develop skills
and infuse right attitudes and values among the
participants of training programmes. The focus is
on the needs of development professionals for
management of ongoing initiatives for rural
development effectively and efficiently. The Institute
could facilitate a high level of satisfaction of
participants by evolving and adopting new training
methods and techniques on a continuous basis. It
has led to improvement in the quality of training
programmes while making them more need-based
and focused. Besides, the findings of research studies
and action research studies, village adoption studies
and case studies are utilised in the training
programmes as training inputs. Further, these

training programmes have attracted a significant
number of international participants across the
world particularly from developing countries of Asia
and Africa. As part of this endeavour, training
programmes addressing various capacity building
needs in respect of poverty alleviation and rural
development programmes are organised. The
Institute has mandate to help and build training
capacities of its link institutions i.e. State Institutes
of Rural Development (SIRDs) and Extension Training
Centres (ETCs).
During 2015-16, the Institute organised 1326
programmes. The year saw an all-time high number
of training programmes and also participants
(38,424). The average score of effectiveness of
training programmes was 85 per cent. Details of
training programmes conducted and categories of
participants at Headquarters and North- Eastern
Regional Centre at Guwahati, Assam are given in
Annexures-I to III.

9

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Objectives

Themes of Training

The programmes of the Institute are designed with
the following objectives:

The overall aim of the programmes is to facilitate
sustainable rural development integrating economic
and environmental dimensions through
empowerment of rural people. Themes have been
planned keeping in view the capacity building needs
of development professionals in the context of
emerging rural scenario. The focus is on effective
planning and management of on-going rural
development flagship programmes.

•

Build awareness, improve skills and broaden
knowledge of the development functionaries
for effective programme planning and
implementation;

•

Develop strategies on emerging needs of rural
population through Workshops, Seminars and
Consultations;

•

Facilitate attitudinal changes among
development personnel;

•

Familiarise the development functionaries
with best practices and success stories in
managing development programmes.

Clientele Groups
NIRD&PR training programmes cater to different
clientele groups engaged in rural development.
These include:
•

Officials associated with implementation of
RD&PR programmes

The main themes include convergence in MGNREGA,
promotion of rural livelihoods and micro-enterprises,
social audit, decentralised planning, good
governance through panchayati raj institutions
(PRIs), rural credit management, drinking water and
sanitation, NRM, gender budgeting, applications of
GIS and ICT technologies for rural development, etc.
These apart, orientation and other programmes are
planned on the new initiatives, namely, Saansad
Aadarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) and Swachh Bharat
Mission (SBM).

Training Methods
Keeping in view the varied nature of the training
imparted and profile of participants attending the
programmes, various training methods are used.
Some of these methods are as follows:

•

Elected members of Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs)

•

Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs)

•

Financial Institutions

•

Lecture-cum-Discussions

•

Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)

•

Case Studies

•

Academicians

•

Group Discussions

•

International participants

•

Panel Discussions

10

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

•

Exercises and Hands-on Sessions

•

Barefoot Engineers under MGNREGA

•

Role plays and Simulation Games

•

•

Field visits

Orientation on MGNREGA Operational
Guidelines – 2013 (with revised Schedules)

•

Social Audit in MGNREGA

•

Poverty and Inequality Estimation

As part of the training methodology, presentations
by the resource persons, who include in-house and
external, sharing of experiences and interactions
among the participants are facilitated. Field exposure
visits to ongoing developmental programmes form
important part of the methods. These will help the
participants to get exposed to the best practices and
success stories so that they can think of replicating
the same in the back-home situations.

Important Themes of Training
Programmes
Panchayati Raj
•

•

Strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs) and Promoting Effective Rural
Development
Integrated District Planning and Tribal SelfGovernance in PESA Areas

•

Panchayati Raj Administration and Rural
Development

•

Financial Management in Panchayati Raj
Institutions

•

Promoting Good Governance through
Panchayati Raj Institutions

Rural Employment
•

Training for State Resource Teams (Technical)
under MGNREGA

Rural Livelihoods
•

Promotion of Sustainable Rural Livelihoods

•

Innovative Strategies for Marketing of Rural
Products

•

Strategies for Promotion of Micro-enterprises

•

Implementation Strategies and Institutional
Mechanisms for NRLM

•

Strategic Financial Management under NRLM

•

Induction Programmes for SRLMs & DRLMs

Rural Credit
•

Effective Credit Delivery Management

•

Investment Credit and Appraisal of Agriculture
term loan proposals

•

Agribusiness Management

11

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

•

Credit Delivery and Recovery Management

•

Modern Survey Techniques for Planning and
Management of PMGSY

•

Open Source QGIS and GPS Applications for
IWMP and MGNREGS

•

ICT Applications for Rural Development

•

ICT Applications and e-Governance

Natural Resource Management
•

Management of Watershed Projects for
Sustainable Development

•

Planning for Production Systems and
Livelihoods in IWMP

•

Participatory Management of Natural
Resources

Others
•

Book-Keeping and Accountancy for IAY

•

Management of Watershed Projects in Hilly
Areas

•

Planning and Management of Drinking Water
and Sanitation Projects

•

Technology and Institutional Arrangements for
Water Resource Management in IWMP

•

Swachh Bharat Mission : Social Marketing
Strategies for Sanitation Professionals

•

Institutionalisation of Best Practices of Social
Audits in IWMP

•

Corporate Social Responsibility in Rural
Development

•

Water Use Efficiency, Equity through
Participatory Irrigation Management

•

Community Based Disaster Management

•

Research Methodology

Social Development
•

Community Participation and Social
Mobilisation for Universalisation of Education

•

Social Development of Rural Women

•

Community Driven Rural Development

•

Social Sector Development in Rural Areas

•

Strategies for Empowerment of Rural Women

•

Promotion of Livelihoods for Rural Women

Important Themes of Workshops
and Seminars
•

Solid Waste Management under Swachh
Bharat Mission

•

Integrated District Planning for Local SelfGovernments

•

Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources

Application of Technologies

•

Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY)

•

•

Gender Budgeting for Rural Development

12

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Watershed Projects

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

•

State Finance Commissions in the Context of
Panchayat Finances

•

Certificate Course for Panchayat Secretaries on
Ensuring Good Governance in Gram
Panchayats

•

Development of Case Studies in Rural
Development

•

Management of RSETIs

•

Module and Material Development to Build
the Capacities of Gram Rozgar Sevak (GRS)

•

Integrated Water Resource Management:
Issues and Options

•

National Colloquium of SIRDs

•

Good Practices under MGNREGA

•

Rural Sanitation in India: Achievements, Trends
and Challenges

•

The New Rural Paradigm: Policies and
Governance

•

Strategies for Promoting Participatory
Irrigation Management

•

Water Use Efficiency, Equity through
Participatory Irrigation Management

International Programmes
As part of efforts to share Indian experience for the
benefit of developing countries, the Institute has
been organising International training programmes
on different themes of rural development. These
programmes are conducted under ITEC & SCAAP
Fellowship Schemes of Ministry of External Affairs,
Government of India and as part of collaborative
programmes of CIRDAP. During 2015-16, 19
International programmes were organised and 308
participants from developing countries attended the
programmes. The participants were drawn from
Asian, African and Latin American countries such as
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Mauritius, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Egypt, Yemen, Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq,
Lavos, Ethiopia, Zimbabwe, Ghana, South Africa,
Sudan, Tanzania, Nigeria, Venezuela, Philippines,
Chile, etc. The details of programmes and
participants are as given below.

International Programmes: 2015-16
S.No.

Category

No. of Programmes

No. of Participants

1

ITEC & SCAAP

14

238

2

CIRDAP

4

58

3

Others*

1

12

Total

19

308

*Sponsored by Government of Nepal

13

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ITEC and SCAAP Fellowship
Programmes of Ministry of External
Affairs, Govt. of India

•

Empowerment of Women for Rural
Development

•

Programme on Good Governance and
Management of RD Programmes

•

Community Driven Rural Development

•

Geo-informatics Applications in Rural
Development

•

Information Communication Technology for
Rural Development

•

Community Based Disaster Management :
Mainstreaming and Risk Reduction Strategies

•

Planning and Management of Drinking Water
and Sanitation Projects

•

Participatory Rural Development

•

Planning and Management of Rural
Development Programmes

•

Management of Rural Employment Projects
for Poverty Alleviation

•

Planning and Management of Rural Housing
and Habitat Projects

•

Sustainable Agricultural Strategies for Rural
Development

•

Training Methodology for Development
Professionals

•

Rural Credit for Poverty Reduction

14

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

MoRD-NIRD&PR-CIRDAP
Collaborative Programmes
•

Sustainable Agriculture for Rural Development

•

Geo-informatics Applications in Rural
Development for Sharing Innovative and Best
Practices

Others
•

Orientation Programme on Poverty Alleviation
and RD Programmes for Nepal Delegation,
Sponsored by Government of Nepal

•

Local Governance and Delivery of Services for
Rural Development

•

Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) Applications for Rural Development

Analysis of Training Programmes
During the year 2015-16, NIRD&PR organised 1326
programmes, which include 1263 programmes
conducted by NIRD&PR, Hyderabad and 63
programmes by NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati.

15

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Regional Off-Campus Training
Programmes

Networking Programmes at
SIRDs

In order to meet the State-specific requirements in
the field of rural development and panchayati raj and
to build the capacities of the faculty members of
SIRDs, ETCs and other RD and PR institutions, 76
Regional off-campus programmes were organised by
NIRD&PR and its Regional Centre.

NIRD&PR has initiated networking programmes at
SIRDs from 2013-14 onwards for facilitating capacity
building on flagship programmes. As part of it, funds
and other academic support are provided to
strengthen the efforts of SIRDs. The feedback on the
programmes indicated that the initiative of the
Institute has helped the SIRDs to reach out to more
number of RD officials and PR functionaries. During
the year, in all 928 programmes were organised
through SIRDs.

Table 1 : Type of Programmes Organised: 2015-16
S.No.

Type

NIRD&PR-NERC

Total

53

250

1.

Training Programmes

197

2.

Workshops & Seminars

53

53

3.

International Programmes

19

19

4.

Off-Campus Programmes

66

5.

Networking Training Programmes

928

Total

1263

Profile of Participants
As evident from Table 2, majority of the participants
of the training programmes were government
officials. A sizable number of participants were from
Research and Training Institutions, NGOs, CBOs and
PRIs. Significant increase has been noticed in the
number of international participants and participants
from financial institutions.

16

NIRD&PR

10

76
928

63

1326

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Table 2: Profile of Participants
S.No.

Category

NIRD&PR

NERC

Total

%

1

Govt. Officials

19480

1138

20618

53.66

2

Financial Institutions

683

3

686

1.79

3

PRIs

598

47

645

1.68

4

NGOs & CBOs

1146

29

1175

3.06

5

National and State
Institutes for Research
and Training

7754

122

7876

20.50

6

Universities and Colleges

109

286

395

1.03

7

International

308

-

308

0.80

8

Other Stakeholders

6453

268

6721

17.49

Total

36351

1893

38424

100

Women

8693

593

9286

24.17

Other Stakeholders,
17.49
International, 0.80

Govt. Officials, 53.66

Univ/ Colleges, 1.03

Natl/ State Instts for
Res. & Trg, 20.50

NGOs/SHGs, 3.06
ZPCs & PRIs, 1.68

Financial
Institutions, 1.79

Govt. Officials, 53.66

Financial Institutions

ZPCs & PRIs

NGOs/SHGs

Natl/ State Instts for Res. & Trg

Univ/ Colleges

International

Other Stakeholders

17

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Training Quality Improvement
Measures Committee (T-QIM)

Special Projects and
Resource Cells

In order to make the training more effective,
measures to improve the qualitative aspects of the
NIRD&PR training programmes have always been the
priority of the Institute. In this regard, a Training
Quality Improvement Measures Committee was
constituted with members drawn from internal and
external subject experts to scrutinise the course
designs and materials and offer suggestive measures.
The Committee meets once in a month and suggests
the required measures for improvement of
programmes to be organised in the ensuing month.

Centre for Geo-informatics Applications in
Rural Development (C-GARD)

Training Feedback
At the end of each training programme, performance
of training programmes is evaluated through eevaluation on a five - point scale with reference to
important components such as training design,
context, training methods, training materials,
speakers’ effectiveness, boarding and lodging
facilities, library facilities, etc., so as to take steps to
improve the training programmes. The overall
average score for the training programmes during
2015-16 was 85 per cent.

18

Geo-informatics Technology has got huge potential
in terms of gathering precise geospatial data on real
and temporal mode on various features on the
ground relating to development programmes, which
has great relevance in the rural development
planning, monitoring and modelling and enhancing
technical skill and capacity building of field
functionaries, project directors, PRIs, Policy Makers,
etc. The Centre for Geo-Informatics Application in
Rural Development (C-GARD) of the Institute works
for design and development of Geospatial
Technologies, application development using high
resolution satellite imagery interpretation and
analysis, Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS),
Photogrammetry, Virtual 3D visualisation techniques
and Web based Geo-informatics Systems for
Application in Rural Development and Panchayati Raj
sector. The Centre designs specific customised
training programmes in Geo-informatics Technology
Applications in areas related to planning, monitoring,
modelling, and decision support systems on
Watershed, MGNREGS, PMGSY, Rural Energy, PMKSY,
Agriculture Development, Environmental Impact
Assessment, Conservation Practices, Resources
Planning, Infrastructure Development, and Village
Planning, etc. Six GIS Facility Centres are established
viz., in Assam, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Kerala and Odisha States, for promoting the use of
scientific information derived from satellites, GPS
and GIS technologies in rural development
programmes. A GIS Facility Centre was also set up at

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Ralegaon Siddhi village in Maharashtra for prompting
Geo-informatics in NGO sector for promotion of
watershed development. Besides, Expert Guidance
is being imparted to M.Sc., M.Tech., Final Year
students in Geo-informatics for academic internship,
for Student Internship of one-year duration. There
are also Ph.D., research students in Geo-informatics
undertaking research studies under C-GARD Faculty.
C-GARD has currently two Academic Distance
Learning Programmes viz. PGC GARD and PGD GARD
for 6 months and one year, respectively for the field
functionaries.
As an endeavour to strengthen India partnership
with Africa, Government of India had approved
establishment of C-GARD Centres in five countries
of Africa viz. Kenya, Algeria, Niger, Equatorial Guinea
and Madagascar in a phased manner. Based on
approval accorded by the Government of India, steps
have been taken to operationalise the process of
establishment of C-GARD Centres in these countries.
The C-GARD Madagascar Technology Centre is in the
process of being established and a MoRD Sponsored
CIT and CGARD Centre have been established in
CIRDAP, Dhaka, Bangladesh, for the CIRDAP Member
Countries.
In addition to above, the Centre carried out the
following activities during 2015-16: 1. Designed &
developed a web based customised package for
IWMP for geohydrology modelling and e-DPR; 2. GIS
based PMGSY Core Network development for 5
districts in Kerala State; 3. Design and development
of web GIS based Decision Support Systems for
Watershed Management; 4. Development of an
Open Source Hindi GIS Software; e-DPR for IWMP;
GIS based Rural Energy Model; DIP Preparations and
Village GIS.

Deen Dayal Upadhyaya -Grameen
Kaushal Yojana (DDU-GKY) Project
The Government of India has set an ambitious target
for providing skill training to 500 million of its youth
by 2022, which is in line with the estimated demand
for skilled manpower over the next decade.
As per the 2011 Census, India has 55 million potential
workers between the age group of 15 and 35 years
in rural areas. The statistics also reveal that many
industrialised nations are facing an ageing population
problem. These countries are expected to face a
cumulative shortage of 57 million workers by 2020.
These numbers represent a historic opportunity for
India to transform its demographic surplus into a
demographic dividend. Several Ministries have been
assigned targets for skilling India's youth to
contribute to the Government's vision for making
India the skill capital of the world.
In today's job market, lack of formal education,
marketable skills and other constraints imposed by
poverty place significant entry barriers. Deen Dayal
Upadhyaya – Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY),
the skill training and placement programme of the
Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD), is therefore,
designed not only to provide high quality skill training
opportunities to the rural poor, but also to establish
a larger ecosystem that supports trained candidates
to secure a better future. It occupies a unique
position amongst other skill training programmes,
due to its focus on the rural poor youth and its
emphasis on sustainable employment through the
prominence and incentives given to post-placement
tracking, retention and career progression.

19

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

quality assurance framework for training
infrastructure and service delivery.

Key Features of DDU-GKY
•

Ensuring that all trainees are from poor rural
households.

•

Ensuring that trainees are able to access
skilling and placement services free of cost.

•

Adopting a Gram Panchayat (GP) saturation
approach to enrolment to enable better
mutual support.

•

Special Components of DDU-GKY
(i)

•

Providing financial assistance for transport/
lodging and food during training.

•

Providing for post-placement support for six
months.

•

Providing for post-placement counselling,
facilitation and tracking for one year.

•

Providing training in a number of trades that
do not require formal education.

•

Working with Gram Panchayat (GP) and SelfHelp Groups (SHGs) to authenticate
performance.

•

Encouraging exemplary performance in skill
development by various stakeholders by
instituting awards by State Government

•

Migration Support and Alumni Network to
enable farm to factory transition.

•

Emphasis on regions like Jammu & Kashmir
(HIMAYAT), 27 Left Wing Extremist Districts
(ROSHNI) and North East States.

•

20

Standards-led delivery Pioneering Standard
Operating Procedures to provide essential

Inclusive Programme Design which involves
mandatory coverage of socially disadvantaged
groups (SC/ST 50 per cent, Minority 15 per
cent, Women 33 per cent)

ROSHNI - Special Initiative for Most Critical
Left-Wing Extremist Affected Areas

A special initiative for most critical left-wing
extremist affected areas, Roshni with separate
guidelines has been launched, that takes into account
the peculiar situation in extremist affected districts.
In particular, it provides for training programmes over
different time periods. Currently these are for three,
six, nine and twelve months. In the twelve month
format, besides the normal, skill, IT and soft skill
training, trainees are also provided National Institute
of Open Schooling (NIOS) certification (8th or 10th)
depending on the level at which they dropped out
of the formal school system.
(ii)

HIMAYAT - Special Scheme for Jammu and
Kashmir

MoRD operates a special scheme under DDU-GKY
for Jammu and Kashmir which covers:
i.

Urban as well as rural youth

ii.

Below Poverty Line (BPL) as well as
Above Poverty Line (APL) persons

iii.

Wage employment in the formal sector
as well as self-employment. This is a 100

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

per cent Centrally funded scheme
implemented with the help of the State
government by a dedicated Himayat
Mission Management Unit located in
both Srinagar and Jammu.

Implementation Model

responsible for national policy-making, funding,
technical support and facilitation. The DDU-GKY
State Skill Missions embedded in general within the
State Rural Livelihood Missions (SRLMs) and
NIRD&PR are envisioned to play a central role in
providing co-funding and implementation support to
DDU-GKY in the State; and the Project Implementing
Agencies (PIAs) who implement the programme
through skill training and placement projects.

DDU-GKY follows a three-tier implementation model.
The DDU-GKY National Unit at MoRD is the agency

Twelfth Plan Targets and Performance (National Overview)
Year

Target

Trained

2012-2013

212,000

217,997

2013-2014

250,000

201,019

2014-2015

210,000

86,120

2015-2016

177,986

270,392

Total

8,49,986

775,528

Target of Training and Placement Achieved in the Year 2015-16
Scheme

No. of Projects

Trained

Placed*

SGSY (SP)

89

19328

11048

DDU-GKY (YPS)

99

42574

11393

DDU-GKY (APS)

305

61482

26047

Himayat

20

18694

14105

Total

513

142078

62593

Source: S-Series data maintained by MoRD.
*Candidate is considered as a placed if he/she is in continuous work for three months with salary slip as
evidence.

21

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Projects Monitored By NIRD&PR– Financial Overview
Scheme

Total Project Cost
` ( In Crore)

Total grant received
from MoRD/State
` (In Crore)

Total grant release to PIA
` (In Crore)

SGSY(SP)

746

599

596

DDU-GKY

1304.35

306.08

278.13

Himayat

249.33

149.91

149.91

2299.68

1054.99

1024.04

Total

1

Yearly Plan (YP) States are those which are implementing the programmes largely depending on CTSA/TSA and MoRD for
manpower, strategy and aim to grow to Action Plan (AP) States.
2

Action Plan (AP) States are those which have manpower dedicated for the programme, a policy for usage of infrastructure
of Government buildings and material to take care of strategy and implementation on their own with only interventional
help from CTSA/TSA and MoRD.

22

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Rural Self-Employment Training
Institute (RSETI) Project
NIRD&PR is the Nodal Agency for implementation
of RSETI Project of Ministry of Rural Development
(MoRD), which aims at mitigating the unemployment
problem prevailing amongst rural youth in general
and BPL in particular. Under the project it is proposed
to have a dedicated infrastructure in each district
called RSETIs for skill development / skill upgradation
of the youth. NIRD&PR is given the responsibility of
receiving and processing the infrastructure grant
proposals from the various sponsoring banks, taking
approval of MoRD, conveying the sanctions and
releasing the funds for building infrastructure.
NIRD&PR also takes up the issues related with
allotment of the land/possession of the land with
various district levels as well as with State level
authorities and tries to resolve them. NIRD&PR also
assists/guides and gives suggestions to banks in
construction of RSETIs buildings. Apart from this,

NIRD&PR is also involved in capacity building of
various stakeholders by conducting workshops for
Nodal Officers of the Bank and Liaison Officers of
the State. NIRD&PR has designed standard
curriculum module for training. NIRD&PR also brings
out various publications such as Enterprise – RSETIs
Quarterly Newsletter, Success Stories, etc. from time
to time, to build up the networking of the RSETIs.

Financial and Physical Progress
as on 31.3.2016
As on date there are 585 functional RSETIs in the
country sponsored by various banks. NIRD&PR has
released an amount of ` 261.85 crore to ` 444 RSETIs
as on 31.3.2016 which covers 29 States and 5 Union
Territories. Construction of RSETI buildings have
been completed in 125 districts and nearing
completion at another 53 locations. Construction is
in progress in remaining districts/ locations.

23

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Workshop on Management of
RSETIs for Nodal Officers
Though there are different functionaries for
monitoring of RSETIs, the major responsibility
remains with the sponsoring Banks. On the advice
of NIRD&PR, each bank has designated a senior
officer as Nodal Officer RSETI at corporate level to
monitor the performance of RSETIs and to guide
them in their day to day affairs. With a view to
equipping Nodal Officers with the latest

24

developments in the field of RSETIs and to build up
their capacity, NIRD&PR is organising a workshop
every year. For the year 2015-16, three days
workshop was conducted during 14th – 16th
September, 2015 at NIRD&PR campus, Hyderabad.
The participants were also taken for a field visit to
SBI RSETI Sanga Reddy, District Medak, Telangana to
have a look at available infrastructure, types of
programmes being conducted, settlement of the
trainees, etc.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Enterprise – NIRD&PR - RSETIs Quarterly Newsletter of RSETIs
NIRD&PR also publishes a
Quarterly Newsletter of RSETIs
titled “Enterprise”, covering news
and events from various RSETIs
across the country, such as
conduct of training programmes,
visit of VVIPs/guest, creation of
infrastructure and success
stories. This Quarterly Newsletter
is very popular and in demand
among the various stakeholders
of RSETIs. Around 3000 copies of
this news- letter are disseminated
to all the RSETIs, Banks, RBI,
NABARD, State governments,
District collectors, PD DRDAs,
LDMs, DDMs and the people
interested in RSETI activities.

25

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

SBI RSETI Ariyalur, Tamil Nadu

SBBJ RSETI Hanumangarh,
Rajasthan

UBI RSETI Mau, Uttar Pradesh

CBI RSETI Ratlam M.P.

Project Enterprise
Poverty and unemployment are the major problems
of the rural areas and it is more so in tribal dominated
and LWE districts. There is lack of opportunities for
wage employment in these areas. NIRD&PR realised
that through skill development and capacity building,
rural youth can be prepared to take up self employment ventures. Further, self-employed
persons act as job creators. Hence, this is a long term solution to rural unemployment and poverty.
In this backdrop NIRD&PR took an initiative for skill
development and capacity building of the youth in
these areas under “Project Enterprise”. The project
is being implemented in association with a few
reputed and well established Programme
Implementing Agencies (PIAs), which are working in
collaboration with one or other ministries and

26

Canara Bank RSETI Aligarh,
Uttar Pradesh

BoI RSETI Burhanpur M.P.

NABARD, with a sole objective of creation of micro enterprises by the youth for his/her sustainable
livelihood.
As on 31.03.2016, NIRD&PR has supported 100 skill
development and capacity building programmes to
benefit as many as 2677 youths spread over different
States and involving CBOs/NGOs covering various
activities across the country. The implementing
CBOs/NGOs do provide handholding support to the
trainees. Average settlement rate is 70 – 75 per cent
in terms of creation of micro - enterprises by the
youth. Under the Project Enterprise more emphasis
is given to service oriented activities than the
manufacturing activities to avoid marketing hassles.
At the end of the training tool kits are provided to
each trainee so that youth are able to start the work
immediately after completion of the training.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Success of Project Enterprise
NIRD&PR published a book titled “Success of Project
Enterprise” explaining the concept of project
enterprise, it’s objectives & needs, training
methodology, achievements, types of programmes/
trainings conducted, coverage of the project
enterprise and success stories from different parts
of the country. These success stories will motivate
the other youth and PIAs to work in this direction.

NRLM Resource Cell
During 2015-16, NRLM (RC), NIRD&PR performed
following major seven activities:
1)

Trainings, Workshops and meet the CB needs
of SRLMs

2)

Development of core trainers for SRLMs

3)

4th Annual National Writeshop

4)

Community Master Trainers' Training
Programme on Social Inclusion and Social
Development

5)

Development of Training Modules

6)

Creation of NRLM CELL at NERC Guwahati

7)

Support to other units of NIRD&PR

Trainings and Workshops
During the year 2015-16, NRLM RC conducted 101
campus, off - campus training programmes and also
coordinated MoRD programmes to SRLM officials,
SIRD faculty members, Capacity Building Agencies,
NGOs, PIAs, Government officials and CBOs, etc. The
following are the details of the CB Programmes.

27

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Details

1

NIRD&PR Campus Trainings

40

1809

NRLM Fellows, SPMs,
DPMs, BBMs, BPFTs, CCs,
CRPs and other
departmental staff

2

Off - campus Training
Programmes conducted
by NRLM (RC)

45

1260

DPMs, BPMs, NGOs, BCCs
and other departmental
staff

3

Off - campus Workshops
supported by NIRD&PR

12

596

CCs, CTs, CMs, BPMs, DPMs,
SPMs, SAPS, Thematic
Experts, VO & CLF EC
members, MD, CEOs

4

NIRD&PR Campus Workshops
coordinated with NMMU, MoRD

4

344

CEOs, SPMs, NGO senior
officials, community

101

4009

Total

No. of
Participants
Programmes

NRLM RC coordinated MoRD programmes in NIRD&
PR such as 4 th Annual National Writeshop,
Interaction with CMSA farmers under MKSP, MKSP
quarterly review meetings, Micro Planning & CIF,
Review meetings on IB and HR, POP –CMSA rollout
strategy, Desk appraisal of MKSP, Brainstorming
workshops on POP Model, Start up Village
Entrepreneurship Programme, Evolving guidelines on
rural artisans, Restructuring of grounded projects
under MKSP, Ultra poor strategy and briefing and de
briefing workshops, National Consultation workshop
with CBOs and NROs on Capacity Building. NIRD&PR
NRLM (RC) actively coordinated and participated in
all the above programmes.

28

Clientele

Development of core
trainers for SRLMs
An intense and rigorous SRLM core trainers' training
programme for 22 days was conducted to 12 SRLM
core trainers on NRLM philosophy and processes
with a mix of classroom and field work segment. This
core trainers' training programme was held at
NIRD&PR during 11th May-31st July-2015 in three
phases in three different batches simultaneously. A
total of 95 participants (identified as core trainers
by different SRLMs) attended who include BPMs,
DPMs, SPMs, working on different thematic areas
of NRLM and other resource persons/CB consultants
who are supporting SRLMs. Apart from the NMMU
&NRLM RC Team, 10-15 resource persons from

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

National Resource pool facilitated the training
sessions. The thematic expertise resource
organisations like Sahabhagi Sikshana Kendra (SSK)
Lucknow (who have expertise in Participatory
Training Methodologies) were also invited as
resource persons.
This SRLM core trainers' training introduces core
trainers to the basic concepts (poverty, vulnerability,
livelihoods, gender, institution building,
interventions, etc.), familiarises them with current
reality and practices on the ground and acquaints
them with the required skills (management,
planning, training and leadership) so that they
contribute more meaningfully to build the capacities
of the different staff of their concerned SRLMs.

•

Discussion, revision and finalisation of NRLM
Framework

•

Revision of Draft Community Operational
Manual (COM) Including block protocols,
gender, social inclusion and social
development process, federation process,
funds to the community and convergence

•

Plan for scaling up in Intensive Blocks, Nonintensive Blocks, Communitisation and
Convergence

•

Revision of Draft COM (3-6 Groups) and HRM
(1-2 Groups) and several sub - groups

•

Revision and Discussion on Human Resource
Management ( HRM)

•

Staffing, Normative Structure in view of
Rationalisation, ASH, GRM

•

HR Management including Selection,
Induction cum Immersion, CB, Hygiene
Factors, and Performance Management (PMS)

•

Sharing and Discussion on CB Modules i.e
capacity building of institutions, members,
leaders, cadres, Trainers/Master Trainers from
the community and Staff Capacity Building

•

Discussion on progress of 2015-16 and
Outlines of State Annual Action Plans AAPs
(2016-17)

th

4 Annual National Writeshop
The 4th Annual National Writeshop on NRLM was
organised from 30th November 2015 to 5th
December 2015 at NIRD&PR Hyderabad. 17 State
Rural Livelihood Missions (SRLM Staff and CEO/MDs)
in the country participated in the National
Writeshop. The main purpose of this writeshop was
to create a forum for State Missions to resolve and
finalise the process, protocols and systems for
implementing NRLM. The agenda for the fourth
national writeshop included.

29

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Shri Atal Dulloo, Joint Secretary, (RL) attended the writeshop on valedictory day i.e., on 5th Dec 2015 and
interacted with SMDs and Senior Project Staff of SRLMs, reviewed the progress of 2015-16 and gave very
valuable advice and guidance for the activities to be taken up during 2016-17.

Community Master Trainers’
Training Programme on Social
Inclusion and Social Development
(SI & SD)
Community Master Trainers’ Training Programme on
SI&SD covering the themes on Gender, FNH WASH
and Inclusion was organised by NRLM (RC) to 112

30

community master trainers (in 3 different batches)
of 5 NRLM States i.e. West Bengal, Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan during
9th -18th March 2016 at NIRD&PR, Hyderabad. As a
part of the training, 4 days field visit was organised
to different villages of Mahabubnagar, Sanga Reddy,
Medak and Karimnagar districts to observe the PwD,
PVTGs, FNH WASH and Gender activities taken up
by community institutions.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

The Director General, NIRD&PR interacted with the participants during the valedictory on 18th March 2016.
The Director General appreciated the Community Master Trainers for their articulation ability, subject
knowledge and commitment to work for other poor women. DG also appreciated the trainers’ team for
effective facilitation of the sessions.

Development of Training Modules
The objective of developing resource material
including modules on important thematic areas of
NRLM, to support the SRLMs to prepare their own
training modules, depending on the region specific.
Different organisations will further develop their
State, region specific modules without missing the
concepts of NRLM. NRLM RC developed Resource
Material on seven thematic Areas.

1.

Community Capacity Building (Vol. II)

2.

Staff Capacity Building

3.

Gender Sensitisation & Social Action

4.

Food, Nutrition, Health and WASH

5.

Social Inclusion (Elderly, Tribal & PwD)

6.

Convergence

7.

PIP-PPA.

31

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

The modules were released by DG, NIRD&PR in the National Workshop held on 28.04.2016. The NRLM RCNIRD&PR modules will bring a common understanding on various aspects of NRLM and it will develop the
common understanding among the community and implementation agencies.

Creation of NRLM (RC) at NERC,
Guwahati
As approved in the EC meeting of MoRD held on
30.03.2015, a new NRLM resource cell has been
created at NERC, Guwahati to cater to the CB needs
of all North Eastern States. The cell started
functioning from August, 2015.

Support to other Units of NIRD&PR
Apart from providing regular capacity building
support to various programmes, NRLM RC staff have

32

been supporting other units of NIRD&PR like CPGS
in their PGDRDM course, especially teaching the
NRLM thematic concepts to the students of PGDRDM
and supporting the CPGS faculty in organising field
visits to learn social mobilisation, social inclusion and
institutional building processes in the different
districts of AP and Telangana States. NRLM Team also
provided support to assess the performance of the
PGDRDM in their assignments written and
presentations and also selection process of PGDRDM
students.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S.R. Sankaran Chair
S.R. Sankaran Chair on Rural Labour was established
by the Institute in 2012 with the funding support of
MoRD, GoI. The main objective of the Chair is to
promote research on issues that would enhance
understanding and help in improving the conditions
of rural labour. Collaborative research, seminars,
workshops and policy dialogues involving
institutions, organisations, policymakers and other
stakeholders with similar objectives and placing the

results in the larger public domain through working
papers, articles in learned journals, books and policy
briefs are part of the activities set out for the Chair.
During the year, the Chair organised a National
Seminar on 'Dynamics of Rural Labour Relations in
India, a Symposium on ‘Dynamics of Rural Labour
Markets in India’ and invited public lectures by Prof.
Amit Bhaduri, Emeritus Professor, CESP, JNU, New
Delhi and Prof. V.K. Ramachandran, Economics
Analysis Unit.

33

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 3

RESEARCH
Research is one of the principal endeavours of
NIRD&PR in view of its foray into wide range of issues
pertaining to rural development. The research
activities undertaken enable to understand emerging
rural development issues arising from time to time.
Besides addressing contemporary issues, research
also aims to focus on current best practices in the
area of rural development. The research activities
also aim at bringing out appropriate insight for
discussion in training programmes conducted by the
Institute. Thus, in overall perspective, NIRD&PR
research enables to build up database on rural
development interventions, successful interventions,
analysis of wide range of socio- economic conditions
with a view to coming up with alternative measures
and so on. The research endeavours, thus enable the
Institute to keep abreast with the contemporary
issues of rural development in the country. Given the
wide range of experience and exposure in the area
of rural development among the faculty members,
the Institute undertakes consultancy research
studies for various other Ministries of Government

34

of India, State Governments, Corporate
Organisations on various issues as desired by them
in respect of rural development. Keeping vast
perspectives of rural development and keeping in
view the importance of research activities in this
regard, a systematic approach is adopted by the
Institute. The following is the brief description on
approach adopted for research activities in the
Institute.

Objectives
The research studies were conducted with the
following objectives in general:
•

Understanding the changing rural socioeconomic scenario with focus on Rural
Development Flagship Programmes;

•

Identifying
major
constraints
implementation of RD programmes;

in

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

•

•

Suggesting suitable policy and programme
interventions for improving the overall
performance of RD programmes;
Developing course material for training
programmes based on research outcome;

Research Themes
Keeping in view the changing socio-economic
conditions and the implementation of various
development interventions, the themes of research
undergo changes from time to time. Currently the
focus of research undertaken during the reporting
period was on the following themes:
•

Rural Livelihoods

•

Rural Infrastructure

•

Rural Credit

•

Natural Resource Management

•

Good Governance

•

Agrarian Issues

•

Geo-informatics and ICT Applications in Rural
Development

•

Poverty Alleviation

•

Gender

•

Human Resources

Focused Areas of Research
Within the broad themes identified for research
studies, some areas were specifically focused for the

research studies. A few of the focused areas of
research were as follows:
•

Rural Employment and related issues

•

Land Reforms and Agrarian Relations

•

Social Audit

•

Credit Utilisation under Self-employment

•

Skill Trainings and Self-Employment

•

Geomatic Applications in Rural Development

•

Gender Relations through development
interventions

•

Promotion of rural technologies

•

Local self-governing institutions and processes
thereof

•

Watershed Management and related issues

•

Equity and social development issues

•

Provisions for weaker sections

•

Successful interventions

•

Disaster Management

Categories of Research Studies
Keeping in view the quality and quantitative issues
to be addressed, NIRD&PR research studies were
broadly undertaken through three broad categories
and these are:i.

NIRD&PR Research Studies

ii.

Case Studies

35

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

iii.

SIRD / Other Collaborative Institutions' Studies

iv.

Action Research Studies

v.

Consultancy Studies

The first category of Research Studies were especially
those studies which were undertaken on macro-level
issues and also participated by more than one faculty

Consultancy Studies 7
22%

member. The SIRD / Other Collaborative Institutions’
studies were especially undertaken through faculty
members of SIRDs and reputed National institutions
in collaboration with faculty of NIRD&PR. The case
studies were basically those studies which were
focused on successful rural development practices,
which were having specific training value.

Research
Studies 9
28%

Action Research 1
3%
SIRD /
Collaborative
Institution
Studies 3
9%

Case Studies 12
38%

Figure 1 : Categories of Research Studies Conducted during the Year 2015-16
Research Tools and Techniques
Sample surveys, Structured interviews, Case studies,
Participatory learning approaches consisting of PRA
techniques, Content analysis, Qualitative
assessments and Impact Analysis, were a few of the
research tools and techniques adopted for the
research studies.

36

Process of Conducting Research
Studies
A systematic approach was adopted while
undertaking the research studies on various themes
identified. At the initial stage, the faculty members
at centre level were involved in a consultation under
the guidance of head of the centre concerned. Based
on the internal discussions held, the research
proposals then were presented before Research
Advisory Group for wider discussion and seeking

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

suggestions. After the presentation before Research
Advisory Group, the proposals then were referred
to Research Advisory Committee for comments and
suggestions. The revised research proposals were
then forwarded to Director General for approval. In
regard to research studies under the category of
SIRD/Collaborative Institutions' studies, etc., the
proposals were referred to an internal committee of
subject experts consisting of senior faculty members
for their comments and observations. On
incorporation of suggestions, etc., the proposals
were then accorded approval by Director General for
conducting the research studies.

Since the span of research studies undertaken cut
across the financial year, the research studies
completed during the year 2015-16 consists of
studies either taken up during the previous years as
well as the studies taken up in the current year. In
all, 17 research studies were completed during the
year under reference and the list is presented at
Annexure-R2.

Quality Control Measures

The salient features / important learnings of these
studies are as follows:

Besides the Research Advisory Committee, several
measures were also undertaken to ensure quality of
research outcome. After completion of the study, the
draft report concerned was presented in the Study
Forum for wider discussion. Based on the suggestions
emerged, the final version of the research report
emerged. At the time of publication, the research
reports were referred to external subject-experts for
their comments so as to ensure quality research
outcome.

These 17 studies were carried out in the States of
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala,
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana,
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.

•

Institutional arrangements towards drought
proofing and drought relief measures in
different years, risk bearing capacity among
small and marginal farmers in the event of
severe drought and documentation of the
coping practices adopted by small and
marginal farmers

•

Documentation with appropriate action points
to bring necessary changes for effective
drought management and to develop coping
mechanisms for the study regions

•

Important initiatives taken up both by the
Central and State governments to strengthen
the GPs, to document good practices and those
of which can be replicated and customised
within the country

•

Document the initiatives by the respective
study States, to examine good practices which

Research Studies Conducted
During the year 2015-16, the Institute took up 32
research studies under different categories (Fig.1).
The details of research studies under different
categories viz., Research Studies, Case Studies and
SIRD / Collaborative Studies are provided at
Annexure-R1.

37

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

can help the other States to follow and the
study should be a reference to other
institutions
•

Case studies on community radios, video
documentary-based on the field visits

•

Type of contents developed and broadcast /
narrowcast by community radios, social impact
of community radios on the people living in
the area of operation and factors for success
or failure including sustainability of community
radios

•

•

•

In-depth understanding of the process and
procedure of integration and functioning of
local self-government as unit of modern
Panchayati Raj system

•

Role of School Development Monitoring
Committee in achieving goals of universal
school education

Facilitate in-depth understanding of the
process and procedure of the district planning
under ADC and improving the knowledge and
skill to prepare the Integrated and
Decentralised District Planning under ADC
provisions and mandates

•

Functioning of School Development
Monitoring Committee in providing quality
education and assessing the quality of
education based in education index

Deriving insights on the workings of effective
gram panchayats through field-based studies
and contributing to the teaching-learning
sharing experiences

•

Identifying the elements of the processes
which has led to making the gram panchayat
of Singhana village effective and
conceptualising the process

•

The case study on performance of ISO certified
GPs on the delivery of basic services helped
the learners to understand the process,
strategies, methods followed for social
mobilisation, participatory planning,
implementation, participatory decision
making, joint efforts on achieving successful
and sustainable village development and
winning awards of appreciation.

•

Impact of Community Based Monitoring
System on people's access to the basic
minimum services

•

Documentation of success of four different
models of Community Based Monitoring
Systems and dissemination of the approaches
and strategies followed by different models
and influence on the field workers and
development functionaries to consider for
replication

•

Understanding the process and procedure of
integration and planning, local selfgovernment under Panchayati Raj System

•

38

Autonomous District Councils (ADCs) and
integration of ADC to State level planning
system

Understanding the process, procedure, various
aspects and dimensions of planning under

The remaining studies, as per their time-frame, are
still going-on and the details are presented at
Annexure-R3. These include the studies taken up in
previous years as well.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 4

ACTION RESEARCH
Action research takes the researchers much closer
to the grassroots problems and prospects while
promoting rural development endeavours. Such
endeavour also enriches the knowledge base among
researchers to understand the issues facilitating rural
development processes. Hence, more emphasis has
been placed on this particular category of research
studies by NIRD&PR.

the implementability of policy recommendations and
assesses the outcomes of such recommendations.
The action research projects are people-centered
and use participatory tools and techniques to elicit
effective participation.

This in context, the focus of NIRD&PR Action
Research is to facilitate the operationalisation of
decentralised development process for emergence
of good governance at local level to ensure socioeconomic transformation. The ‘facilitation’ process
encompasses social mobilisation, technology
transfer for productivity enhancement, value
addition, etc., capacity building through training and
non-training functions, networking of local
institutions, social development, participatory
decision making, etc. Action Research is carried out
in project villages as “social laboratories” for effective
learning of trainees. It is taken up in order to test

i)

To test the implementability of policy
recommendations of NIRD&PR research
projects and assess the outcomes of such
recommendations;

ii)

To find out field level solutions to the critical
problems experienced in implementation of
RD and Poverty Alleviation programmes;

iii)

To suggest effective strategies for transfer of
technology to tiny producers for enhancing
their incomes; and

iv)

To experiment with new (innovative) ideas for
achieving development objectives with a view

Main Objectives

39

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

to proposing alternative cost – effective
programme interventions.

•

Participatory disaster preparedness and
management

Given the contemporary research outcome and the
current issues/problems that need immediate
attention, NIRD&PR focuses upon several themes for
action research. A few of the themes focused upon
were:

•

Empowering tribal community through
developing capacities on value addition to
NTFP

•

Capacity- building and empowerment

•

Value addition to NTFP

•

Dairy development

•

Wage employment

•

Disaster management

•

Participatory Planning

•

Application of Geo-informatic technologies

•

Gender

•

Livelihoods promotions

Focused Areas of Action Research
Within the broad themes identified, specific focused
areas were chosen to undertake action research
projects. The specific focused areas for action
research were:
•

Empowerment of SHG members

•

Mobilising and empowering wage seekers

•

40

Promotion of participatory planning by using
people - friendly technologies

Categories of Action Research
Studies
Given the experience of NIRD&PR and also based on
micro and macro level of focus on action research
studies, there are two types of action research
studies pursued. The first category is conventional
action research with emphasis on larger area as well
as wider range of issues to be covered. The second
category is Village Adoption Studies, wherein the
focus is at micro-level by adopting specific backward
village across the country. Under the second
category, instead of identifying the issues and then
pursuing action research, the faculty members are
involved in holistic development of the village
through participatory approach and strengthen the
capacities of the villagers. The process is then
captured through action research methods to bring
out learning experiences and distinguish the same
in terms of typical conditions prevailing in the village
concerned.

Action Research Tools and
Techniques
As part of action research, methods like sensitising
the targeted community through personal
interaction, capacity-building and awareness

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

generation, appropriate skill inculcation and
upgradation, mobilising the community for
participatory action, survey on socio - economic data,
participatory rural appraisal (PRA) techniques for
data collections, focus group discussions (FGDs),
process documentation, etc., are adopted.

areas of action research intervention. The proposal,
then generated, is discussed at internal forum and
then the usual process is adopted as under formal
research.

Action Research Studies Taken up
Process of Conducting Action
Research

During the year 2015-16, one formal action research
study was taken up on “Development of Model
Village as per SAGY”.

Based on the issues identified through formal
research, NIRD&PR faculty identifies their focused

8
7

7
6
5
4
3

3
2
1

1

0
Action Research Studies
Taken up during 2015-16

Action Research Studies
Completed

Action Research Studies
Ongoing

Figure 2 : Status of Action Research Studies

Action Research Studies
Completed

The salient features / important learnings of the
completed studies are as follows:
•

During the year, three action research studies were
completed. These three studies were carried out in
the States of Maharasthtra, Tamil Nadu and Kerala.

GIS based GP planning integrating all layers of
information & DSS

41

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

•

Livelihood development, community based
disaster management, optimum resource
utilisation

•

Resource optimisation, community based
planning, resource conservation

•

Model GP development through GIS based GP
planning

•

Mobile based MGNREGA asset capturing,
spatial tool for MGNREGA implementation.

•

Similar Mobile Application can be developed
for all MoRD flagship programmes.

Seven action research studies are continuing still. The
details are presented in Annexure-R4. In regard to
Village Adoption Studies, the list of Village Adoption
studies is presented in Annexure-R5.

42

New Initiatives under Village
Adoption Studies
Besides encouraging the NIRD&PR faculty members
to undertake Village Adoption studies, similar
emphasis has also been placed in collaboration with
Bankers through Rural Technology Park initiatives. As
part of this endeavour, the Rural Technology Park
division took a lead in collaboration with Banking
Institutions to adopt villages to promote
development initiatives for social and economic
development of the villages concerned. The
approach was quite successful since many banking
institutions expressed their desire for the
development of villages on participatory approaches
with emphasis on capacity-building, facilitating
financial assistance, etc. NABARD has also been
actively engaged in the exercise. Interactive meetings
with banking institutions, officials from NABARD,
etc., are initiatives during the year.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 5

CONSULTANCY STUDIES
Given the expertise available with faculty members
of NIRD&PR and the wider attention garnered by the
Institute, various Ministries of Government of India
and State Governments, Corporate Sector
organisations often approach NIRD&PR to undertake
specific objective oriented research studies,
evaluation studies, etc. These studies are classified
as Consultancy Studies. A few of the clientele group
in this regard are from Ministry of Panchayati Raj,
Ministry of Human Resources Development, Ministry
of Water Resources, Planning Commission,
Government of Kerala, etc.

The process of undertaking Consultancy studies is
based on the expertise available with each centre of
the Institute. Given the mandate of the study, each
centre undertakes these studies based on the
requests received.
During the year, seven consultancy studies were
taken up and 15 consultancy studies are on-going.
The list of these studies is presented in AnnexureR6 and Annexure-R7.

43

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Figure 3 : Status of Consultancy Studies
The number of Consultancy studies completed during the year were 14 and the details are presented in
Annexure-R8. All the 29 States were covered in different studies.

The salient features / important learnings of these
studies are as follows:
•

Mobile based Agro Advisory for Agriculture,
Fisheries & Animal Husbandry

•

DPR preparation for watershed, estimation of
works, planning for RD programmes

•

To develop ICT Mobile Application for all
development programmes, decision making by
GPs, participation by committee

•

Helped SLNAs to prepare DPR for watershed
planning, helped standardisation on cost
estimation of working of watershed and similar
development can be made in other RD
programmes

44

•

Documenting the Intensive Participatory
Planning Exercises (IPPE) process in the
selected Gram Panchayats, identifying critical
areas in capacity building provided to BPTs and
also identifying the suitable support system
needed for organising effective Intensive
Participatory Planning Exercise (IPPE)

•

Quantify the impact of IPPE process on select
variables, including the capacity of PRI

•

IPPE was implemented in 2500 backward
blocks during the year 2015-16, where
planning took place in participatory way to
prepare the labour budgets realistically
including the identification of shelf of projects.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

•

•

•

In IPPE GPs, regarding the approved labour
budget and the per cent of person-days
generated for 2015-16 (till 5th November
2015), mixed trends are observed.
It was presumed that high labour budget
variation States would report good
implementation of IPPE and thereby resulting
in more impact interms of performance of
MGNREGS but no such trend was seen. For
instance, Jharkhand though a low variation
State, awareness about IPPE was high, and
implementation of IPPE was good and thereby
resulting in good perceived impact. But this
case is vis-s-vis with high variation State of
Assam.
The study results could not establish a clear
link between participation in MGNREGS and
awareness on MGNREGS. It is hypothesised
that higher awareness level about IPPE would
lead to higher participation in IPPE and this
would further give rise to larger impact of
IPPE. But the study does not provide any
evidence substantiating this hypothesis. .

•

The study could not establish a positive
difference between IPPE and non-IPPE GPs in
terms of performance of MGNREGS.

•

The results of the analysis suggest that
participation in IPPE process is key to ensuring
better reactions to IPPE processes adopted and
ensuring better impact on IPPE, favourable
reactions to the processes adopted under IPPE
are a pre- requisite.

•

Monitoring of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Mid-day
Meal, Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan

were conducted to assess the accuracy of the
data provided by the school staff.
•

Unified District Information System for
Education (U-DISE) data provide the basic
information provided by the project authority
concerned, it is also quite essential to verify
the data based on a sample check.

•

Assessing the accuracy of the school data since
information provided by the school staff
provides opportunity for the policy makers to
make proper decisions. Accurate data would
give chance to plan the programmes properly
and to see that the benefits reach the needy.

•

Impact of watershed programme on change
in land use pattern, access to drinking water,
increase in irrigated area, cropping area, yields
and income. With the increase in foodgrain
production in the country and with an access
to subsidised foodgrains through ration shops,
the food security of the people has increased.

•

Nutrition aspects will be included not only with
disposable income in hand but also with
secure access to an appropriately nutritious
diet coupled with a sanitary environment,
adequate health services and care to ensure a
healthy and active life for all household
members.

•

Awareness and participation level of the GP
members in MGNREGS as well as IPPE are not
up to the expected levels. A special drive
would help fill this gap ( all the GP members
should be thoroughly exposed to the entire
planning process and this should be taken
up on a mission mode).

45

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

•

Though the awareness and participation levels
of GP members are low, their reactions to the
process of planning / IPPE in MGNREGS are
high and anticipating more benefit.

•

Among the unverifiable works, majority of
them are individual works rather than
community works, to address this issue, Gram
Sabha should ensure that all completed works
(cent per cent) should be authenticated by the
beneficiary in a public hearing/meeting.

•

In most of the States, Social Audit practices are
not effective and not carried out to this date.
The States need to ensure that each asset
created should pass through the social audit
exercise. Wherever unverifiable works are
listed, respective States can take a special
initiative or drive to identify these works by
doing special social audits and recover the
complete money spent on such unverifiable
works.

•

In case of community assets, to ensure proper
maintenance and good condition of assets,
user groups can be formed who can be
entrusted with the task of monitoring the use
and maintenance of the assets thus created.

•

To ensure that the individual assets are
maintained properly in a timely manner, the

46

GP should have a MoU with the individual
beneficiary with a clause ensuring that if the
asset is not maintained or not used, the
beneficiary should repay the expenditure.
•

Land value has increased due to individual land
development activities, more focus and
priority should be given to build individual
assets as well as for land development
activities.

•

Teachers working in the government schools
have ‘failed’ in providing accurate data to the
centre on the amenities in their schools under
Sarva Siksha Abhiyan Scheme.

•

The school head teachers, principals of junior
colleges, mandal educational officers, officers
of district project (SSA) and DIET faculty should
be given training on collection and utilisation
of U-DISE data.

The summaries of various research studies / action
research / case studies taken up by the faculty
members of NIRD&PR has been published in the
form of books / papers / articles in reputed national/
international journals. The details of publications
with ISBN/ISSN numbers (individual-wise) are
enclosed at Annexure-R9.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 6
NETW
ORKING WITH ST
ATE INSTITUTES OF R
URAL
NETWORKING
STA
RURAL
DEVEL
OPMENT (SIRD
s) AND EXTENSION
DEVELOPMENT
(SIRDs
TRAINING CENTRES (ET
Cs)
(ETC
Training of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj
functionaries has a three-tier institutional set-up
with NIRD&PR, SIRDs and ETCs at national, State and
regional levels, respectively. NIRD&PR has a
mandate to strengthen the SIRDs and ETCs so as to
build the capacities of large mass of Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj functionaries
through training and Faculty Development/
Continuing Education. These efforts are expected to
result in improved planning and implementation of
development programmes. As a part of this
networking effort, NIRD&PR has been coordinating
key schemes and events as highlighted in this
chapter.

National Colloquium of SIRDs and
Regional Meetings with SIRDs &
ETCs

annual Colloquium of SIRDs and ETCs (b) Conducting
regional meetings of SIRDs & ETCs. While the
Colloquium facilitates an overview of the SIRD
activities in general, the regional meetings serve as
a platform for detailed interaction and networking
between NIRD&PR, SIRDs and ETCs. The Research
and Training Division coordinates these events.
During the year 2015-16, the National Colloquium
of SIRDs was held on 15.6.2015 at NIRD&PR,
Hyderabad in association with the Ministry of Rural
Development (MoRD), Government of India. The
Colloquium was chaired by Shri S M Vijayanand,
Secretary (MoPR) and Director General, NIRD&PR.
The senior officers of MoRD and MoPR, Heads and
Faculty members of 28 SIRDs, Heads and Faculty
Members of NIRD&PR and State Link Officers of
NIRD&PR attended the Colloquium.

The major functions of NIRD&PR in relation to
networking with SIRDs and ETCs are (a) Convening

47

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

NIRD&PR Off-campus Training
Programmes at SIRDs
With a view to strengthening the capabilities of
faculty members of SIRDs, NIRD&PR has evolved a
Scheme for conducting Off-campus programmes at
different SIRDs. As per the system in vogue, at the
beginning of the year the programmes to be offered
at each SIRD is decided by NIRD&PR as per norms
and in consultation with them. The same are
included in NIRD&PR Annual Training Calendar.
During the year under report, NIRD&PR organised
as many as 76 Off-campus programmes at different
SIRDs across the country.

48

The Off-campus programmes were planned to meet
the emerging training and development needs of
faculty and development functionaries. The focus of
these training programmes was on areas such as:
Decentralised Planning, Micro-Enterprise
Development, Rural Technologies, Natural Resources
Management, Rural Marketing, MGNREGA, PMGSY,
TSC, NRDWP, IWMP, IAY, NSAP, NRLM, PURA, BPL
Census, Land Management & Administration,
Transparency & Accountability, E-Governance,
Geographical Information System (GIS),
Convergence, Right to Information Act 2005, Office
Management, Leadership, Organisational Behaviour
and Inter-Personal Skills (Soft Skills), Project

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Management, Weaker Sections, Minorities, Women,
Children and Disabled, Innovations in Rural
Development, Disaster Management and Training of
Trainers, amongst other programmes.

NIRD&PR-State Link Officers
(SLOs) Scheme
The scheme is in vogue for the last few years. Under
the scheme, the NIRD&PR Faculty Members are
designated as State Link Officers (SLOs) to assist the
States and SIRDs in the context of imparting training
to RD & PR functionaries. The scheme has been
revised with a new set of guidelines and was
extended to cover other fraternity of Sub-State level
RD training institutions viz., Extension Training
Centres (ETCs)/Regional Institutes of Rural
Development (RIRDs), Panchayati Raj Training
Centres (PRTCs) and District Institutes of Rural
Development (DIRDs), which are working in different
States. The SLOs have been providing needed
academic support to the State Governments, the
SIRDs & ETCs and other RD Training Institutions in
the areas of training, research and action research.

Central Scheme for Strengthening
of SIRDs and ETCs
The SIRDs and ETCs are State and regional level rural
development training institutions for imparting
training to the rural development and Panchayati Raj
functionaries, elected representatives of Panchayati
Raj Institutions and members of SHGs at district,
block and village levels, respectively. As these

institutions have developed over a period of time,
they remain at different stages of growth in terms
of physical infrastructure, faculty, staff, etc.
The Ministry of Rural Development, under the
Central scheme of ‘Management Support to RD
Programmes and Strengthening of District Planning
System’ has been extending support to the training
activities of States for effective implementation of
Rural Development and Panchayati Raj programmes
by providing financial support to SIRDs and ETCs. In
this context, the NIRD&PR has been mandated to
channelise the funding support to SIRDs and ETCs
by way of scrutinising the proposals and making
SIRD-ETC specific recommendations to MoRD to
consider sanction of funds under the scheme. The
details of the Scheme are as follows:

Strengthening of State Institutes of
Rural Development (SIRDs)
The SIRDs aim at improving the knowledge, skills and
attitude of rural development functionaries and
elected representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions
at State and district levels. At present, there are 29
SIRDs, one in each State.
The courses conducted by SIRDs include the Flagship
Programmes of MoRD and MoPR, Training Skills and
Methodology for ETCs, Planning and implementation
of RD projects, Rural Credit, Computer Information
System for RD, Courses for BDOs, Voluntary
Organisations, Management Development
Programmes, Integrated Watershed Development,
etc.

49

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

100 per cent Central assistance is provided by MoRD
to SIRDs for Non-Recurring expenditure for
strengthening of infrastructure development
including campus development works, procurement
of teaching aids, office equipment and furniture &
fixtures.
The MoRD is providing 50 per cent of the recurring
expenditure to the SIRDs in ‘non - North-East States’
and 90 per cent of the recurring expenditure to the
SIRDs in ‘North-East States’. In addition, 100 per cent
reimbursement of expenditure on the salaries of five
core faculty members is provided by MoRD to all
SIRDs on year to year basis.
During the year 2015-16, 6 out of 29 SIRDs submitted
the Non-Recurring Grant proposals seeking funding
support for development of physical and training
infrastructure (buildings including campus
development works, teaching aids and office
equipment, Furniture & Fixtures, etc.) and
procurement of training-aids. The proposals
submitted by SIRDs were scrutinised by NIRD&PR
and were recommended for ` 557.97 lakh to MoRD
for sanction.

Strengthening of Extension Training
Centres (ETCs)
The Extension Training Centres (ETCs) are the subState level Training Institutions to impart training to
the rural development functionaries and elected
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions at
district, block and GP level. There are 89 ETCs
established and upgraded all over the country. They

50

have been conducting courses with focus on Flagship
Programmes of MoRD & MoPR. In addition, the ETCs
are conducting courses for Village Extension Officers,
Gram Sevaks, Sevikas, Secretaries of Panchayats and
Cooperatives and grassroots level functionaries of
development departments. Besides, the ETCs are
imparting training to the elected representatives of
PRIs at block and GP level and to members of SHGs
and other community based organisations.
Consequent upon increase in the number of
developmental functionaries and the need for
providing training to large number of elected
representatives and members of Panchayati Raj
institutions, the ETCs have acquired an added
significance. Central assistance to ETCs is provided
by MoRD @ 100 per cent for non-recurring and up
to a maximum of ` 20 lakh per ETC per annum for
recurring expenditure to enable them to cope with
increased training load for capacity building of RD &
PR functionaries and PRI members.
During the year (2015-16 ), 12 State Governments
have submitted the Non-Recurring Grant proposals
in respect of 28 ETCs, (which includes proposals from
Maharashtra, new ETC at Chandrapur, Mul) seeking
funding support for development of physical and
training infrastructure (buildings, teaching aids and
office furniture/equipments) and procurement of
training-aids. The proposals submitted by ETCs were
scrutinised by NIRD&PR and an overall NonRecurring Grant of ` 1719.08 lakh was recommended
to MoRD for sanction.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Training Programmes of SIRDs
and ETCs
The ‘network’ of NIRD&PR-SIRDs-ETCs has increased
the spectrum of training activities both in terms of
increased number of programmes organised and
coverage of clientele groups, especially by way of
organising specific training programmes, workshops
and seminars. The targeted number of training
programmes conducted by SIRDs and ETCs included
different modes viz., Face to Face, Off-campus, Outreach Programmes, apart from Distance Mode of
Training. A few SIRDs viz. Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
Gujarat, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan, West Bengal adopted the Distance Mode
of Training by availing of SATCOM facilities. The liberal
funding support extended by MoRD under the
Central scheme enabled these Institutions to
organise larger number of training programmes.
With the launching of Flagship Programmes by MoRD

viz., MGNREGA, NRLM, PMGSY, Rural Housing,
Drinking Water and Sanitation, Watershed
Development, etc., and other Centrally sponsored
development schemes by the GoI, the SIRDs were
called upon to focus their training on these initiatives,
among other State-specific programmes.
The SIRDs are expected to upload their Annual
Training Calendar (ATC) on the MoRD web portal of
www.ruraldiksha.nic.in. They are expected to take
steps for sharing training material with other SIRDs
and ETCs by uploading the available material on the
MoRD website and to initiate action to develop ‘Elearning’ materials with the guidance of NIRD&PR
and other SIRDs.
The SIRDs and ETCs are expected to report their
monthly training performance to MoRD, in the
prescribed format, through web-based onlinereporting system by registering on MoRD website at
www.ruraldiksha.nic.in.

51

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 7

DOCUMENTATION
The success of rural development programmes,
among other things, depends on access to
information, which is one of the critical inputs in the
process of rural development. Provision of timely and
relevant information to different stakeholders is of
prime importance for effective implementation of
development programmes and achieving desired
results. Centre for Development Documentation and
Communication (CDC) at NIRD&PR, with a view to
providing information support to the research,
training and action research activities of the Institute
and also to other members of the development
community, has been engaging itself in identifying
and collecting rural development literature and
systematically documenting the same for effective
and wider dissemination. A rich collection of books,
journals and CDs/VCDs on rural development and
allied aspects gathered over the years is the strength
of NIRD&PR and constitutes the information
resource base for disseminating the information. The
Institute brings out various publications and offers
information services in its endeavour to effectively

52

disseminate rural development information to the
stakeholders.

Information Sources
Books
Books, reports and other institutional publications
form major source of information. During the period
under review, the Institute added a total of 461 books
and other documents to its collection.

Periodicals
The Institute subscribed to 142 Indian and foreign
journals during the period under review, 45 journals
were received on exchange and complimentary basis
and about 60 newsletters were received from
different rural development institutions. CDC also
subscribed to on-line databases viz., Indiastat.com,
JSTOR and ProQuest-Social Science Journals and
ebrary Social Science Collection (e-Books).

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CD Rom/Video Cassettes
Audio-visual materials form a major input in the
training programmes organised by the Institute. A
total of 33 CDs/DVDs were added to the collection
during the period under review.

Hindi Section
The Institute maintains a separate collection of Hindi
books for the benefit of participants and staff. Based
on necessity and demand there is regular addition
of books in this section.

Updation of Databases
Computerised databases of books and journal
articles that are updated and maintained on a
continuous basis form the major strength of
NIRD&PR. Based on these databases, the Institute
provides various information services. Presently the
books database consists of 93240 books and 125188
references in journal articles database.

CDC Information Products/Services
CDC disseminates information through CDC Alerts,
CDC Index and Newspaper clippings. All these
publications were brought out regularly during the
period under review. In addition, CDC provides
services like literature searches, photocopying, interlibrary loan, etc., to its users.

Institutional Membership
CDC maintains details relating to NIRD&PR
Institutional Membership that is offered by NIRD&PR
to rural development organisations and institutions.
The members are entitled to free subscription to
'Journal of Rural Development', 'NIRD&PR
Newsletter' and all un-priced publications and 50 per
cent discount on all priced publications of NIRD&PR.

Library statistics from April, 2015 to March, 2016
1.

Total stock as on 31-3-2016
(Including books, Hindi books and bound volumes of periodicals)

2.

Total intake during the year ending 31.3.2016

3.

A.V Material (Video Cassettes & CDs)

4.

Periodicals subscribed
Periodicals received on exchange
Periodicals received on gratis

120262

461
33
142
25
20
(Contd...)

53

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Newsletters
Total periodicals intake
Number of Newspapers subscribed
5.

6.

Research Scholars visited library

7.

Documentation Services
Number of articles indexed during the year
Number of CDC Alerts issued
Number of CDC Index issued

8.

54

Utilisation of CDC Library Facilities
Number of borrowers
Number of documents lent to participants
Number of visitors to Library

CDC Database
Number of entries in the database (books)
Number of articles
Number of literature searches carried out from the database

60
247
28

952
979
5383
26
1037
10
12

93240
125188
147

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 8
INFORMA
TION DISSEMIN
ATION
INFORMATION
DISSEMINA

The Institute has a mandate to disseminate
information on rural development and Panchayati
Raj. In fulfilling the mandate, the Institute brings
out regularly a quarterly journal, a monthly
newsletter, research highlights, and Rural
Development Statistics. As a leading publisher of
rural development literature in India, NIRD&PR
endeavours to share its research findings, observed
field realities and views on issues of current topical
importance with policy planners, academics and
others through its regular publications, occasional
papers, etc. The publications of NIRD&PR serve the
policy makers in terms of providing feedback of
ground level realities, offer suggestions and
guidelines for better planning and management of
rural development programmes.

Publications
Journals and Periodicals
The quarterly Journal of Rural Development (JRD) is
the flagship publication of NIRD&PR and is one of
the leading academic journals in the field of rural
development and decentralised administration. With
impressive circulation both within and outside the
country, it is one of the most sought-after journals
by the academic community, rural development
administrators and planners. JRD has, over the years,
built up a reputation for high standard of articles and
promptness of publication.
The papers received for publication are reviewed
thoroughly at different levels, both by the NIRD&PR
faculty and the outside subject matter specialists to
ensure quality.

55

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

During the year, four issues of JRD (Vol.34 No.2, 3
and 4 and Vol.35 No.1) containing 32 articles and 19
book reviews were brought out.

2.

Adivasis in India: Issues of Livelihood and
Labour Market, Public Action and Market
Solutions - S.R. Sankaran Chair Research on
Rural Labour Matters through the Prism Equity
Matters (Series No. 1)

3.

Labour and Employment Issues in the Context
of Emerging Rural-Urban Continuum:
Dimensions, Processes and Policies S.R. Sankaran Chair Research on Rural Labour
Matters through the Prism Equity Matters
(SRSC Conference Proceedings)

NIRD&PR Newsletter
The NIRD&PR Newsletter ‘’Pragati’’ a monthly
publication, highlights the recommendations of
various training programmes, seminars and
workshops, and important events which are
undertaken by NIRD&PR on a regular basis. The
Newsletter covers the news of faculty development,
success stories, visits and delegations – both Indian
and foreign – to the Institute, etc. Through this
medium, NIRD&PR maintains regular contacts with
SIRDs, DRDAs and NGOs. Newsletters No.239 to No.
250 covering issues from April 2015 to March 2016
were brought out during the year.

Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY)
1.

2.

3.

Samanvay: A Compilation of Central Sector,
Centrally Sponsored & State Schemes for
Convergence under SAGY for 29 States and 7
Union Territories

Rural Livelihoods
1.

Impact of IAY and SGSY/NRLM on Minorities:
An Evaluation Study under Prime Minister’s
new 15-Point Programme

2.

Best Practices in Panchayats- Management
and Service Delivery Vol. I

3.

Best Practices in Panchayats on Livelihoods and
Natural Resource Management Vol. II

Agriculture

Sankalan- Initiatives in SAGY Gram PanchayatsEnglish and Hindi

1.

National Workshop on Good Practices in Rural
Development Sector, A Compendium of Entries
(SAGY)

National Consultation on Policy Perspective
and State Response to Agrarian Crisis and
Farmers' Distress (Report)

2.

Sustainable Agriculture: Challenges and
Prospects

S.R. Sankaran Chair

Disaster Management
1.

56

Development by Dispossession - S.R. Sankaran
Chair Research on Rural Labour Matters
through the Prism Equity Matters (SRSC Public
Lecture Series 1)

1.

Disaster Management in India: Evolution of
Institutional Arrangements and Operational
Strategies

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
1.

2.

3.

11.

A Handbook on Capacity Enhancement of
Gram Rozgar Sahayak (GRS)

MGNREGS- Documents, Forms and Registers,
Training Module for Barefoot Technicians,
Learning Unit 2.3

12.

Samarthya: Technical Training Manual
(MGNREGA)

MGNREGS-ICT and MIS, Training Module for
Barefoot Technicians, Learning Unit 2.4

13.

Session Plan, Barefoot Technician Training
Programme

Construction Measurement and Calculations,
Training Module for Barefoot Technicians,
Learning Unit 1.1 (English & Hindi)

4.

Maps, Sketches and Drawing, Training Module
for Barefoot Technicians, Learning Unit 1.2
(English & Hindi)

5.

Construction Technology and Building
Materials, Training Module for Barefoot
Technicians, Learning Unit 1.3 (English & Hindi)

6.

Survey and Setting out Construction Works,
Training Module for Barefoot Technicians,
Learning Unit 1.4 (English & Hindi)

7.

Preparation of Basic Estimates, Bill of
Quantities, Schedule of Rates and
Measurement Book, Training Module for
Barefoot Technicians, Learning Unit 1.5
(English & Hindi)

8.

MGNREGS- Key Features, Training Module for
Barefoot Technicians, Learning Unit 2.1
(English & Hindi)

9.

Permissible Works, Training Module for
Barefoot Technicians, Learning Unit 2.2
(English & Hindi)

10.

Construction of Rural Roads, Training Module
for Barefoot Technicians, Learning Unit 2.2.1
(English & Hindi)

Post Graduate Certificate Programmes
1.

Post Graduate Certificate Programme in
Geospatial Technology Applications in RD
(PGC-GARD), A Distance Mode Programme of
NIRD&PR), GARD 404 RD

2.

Post Graduate Certificate Programme in
Geospatial Technology Applications in RD
(PGC-GARD), A Distance Mode Programme of
NIRD&PR) GARD 406 GEO – INFORMATIC LAB
PRACTICE (GLP)

Research Reports
One of the main functions of NIRD&PR is research,
covering impact assessment, monitoring studies,
diagnostic studies, case documentation, etc. The
findings of these research studies are published as
reports every year after suitable editing for wider
dissemination. During the year, the following
Research Reports were published:
1.

A Study on Watershed and its Impact on
Poverty Alleviation and Sustainable
Livelihoods: A Comparative Study in Six States
(Report Series 101)

2.

Study on Marketing of SGSY Products in Pune
District of Maharashtra: Case of Public Private
Partnership (Report Series 102)

57

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

3.

4.

58

Traditional Irrigation System in Bihar ( Report
Series 103)
Effectiveness of Watershed Management: A
Study of Some Successful Watershed Projects
in Five States ( Report Series 104)

Other Publications
1.

Annual Report – 2014- 15

2.

Annual Accounts – 2014-15

3.

Training Calendar – 2016-17

4.

Rural Development Statistics 2014-15

5.

Research Highlights 2012-14

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 9
RURAL TECHNOLOGY PARK
The Rural Technology Park (RTP) was started at
NIRD&PR in the year 1999. Established in an area of
about 65 acres of land, it is envisaged as an
instrument for demonstration and transfer of
technologies to villages. RTP has a vision to serve as
a catalyst to accelerate wide dissemination of
appropriate and affordable technologies to rural
poor for increasing productivity and enhancing
quality of life, thereby enabling community to move
towards sustainable development. The National
Rural Building Centre at RTP showcases model rural
houses constructed with different technologies. The
Sanitation Park houses key sanitation models. A Rural
Technology Mela is organised every year and about
10000 to 12000 people visit from various parts of
the country. Various Self-Help Groups, Innovators,
Government Institutions, Banks, SGSY organisations,
etc., participate in the exhibition. RTP organises
training programmes for rural youth and women on
various rural technologies for skill development
besides to the Government functionaries, Rural
Development Officers, etc.

Skill Development Programmes
During the year, 42 training programmes (which
include eight exposure visits and three workshops)
were conducted. The number of candidates trained
were 1009 (640 male & 369 female).
The details of the programmes are given in Tables 1,
2, 3 and 4.

Training Methodology
To enable the prospective trainees to make a decision
on their own regarding the technology for training,
exposure visits for a day or two are encouraged from
the villages in groups and exposed/explained to them
the technologies by a live demo at the respective
technology units at RTP.
An interaction takes place on the second half of the
day with them and arrive at the technology in which
they are comfortable in learning based on their

59

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

capacity and marketability of the product and the
trainings are offered in the technology chosen by
them after such a detailed interaction.

suggested for transferring of those technologies to
the rural community in a big way.

All the trainings are hands on experience coupled
with theoretical aspects.

Visit of Parliamentary Standing
Committee to RTP on 30.1.2016

Visit of Parliamentary
Consultative Committee to RTP
on 18.11.2015
A Parliamentary consultative committee headed by
Hon’ble Union Minister for Rural Development Shri
Choudhary Birender Singh visited Rural Technology
Park on 18.11.2015.
A brief power point presentation was given by Shri S
M Vijayanand, Secretary, Panchayati Raj, Govt. of
India/Director General, NIRD&PR about the concept,
activities of Rural Technology Park. Thereafter, the
committee visited all the sixteen different housing
models of different region specific typologies
showcased in Rural Building Centre, all the livelihood
technology units established in RTP besides the
sanitation park where different sanitation models are
showcased.
The committee evinced keen interest in all the
technologies showcased in general and in the leaf
plate making, compressed mud blocks making, solar
lighting and de-hydration, re-glowing of failed lights,
natural dye and handmade paper technologies in
particular.
The consultative committee desired that the mud
block making technology, handmade paper
technology, leaf plate making technology and solar
technology need to be given special emphasis and

60

The Parliamentary Standing Committee headed by
Hon’ble Shri Venu Gopal, Member, Parliament visited
Rural Technology Park on 30.1.2016. They had visited
all the model houses showcased in Rural Building
Centre, the livelihood technology units besides the
sanitation park. They had interacted with the
Director General and the RTP team with regard to
the concept and functioning of the RTP. While
appreciating the innovative effort through the RTP
intervention advised for adopting an aggressive
approach for the transfer of all these technologies
in general and more particularly sustainable house
building technologies, solar technologies both
lighting and livelihood based, leaf plate making
technology, re-glow technology, natural dye, organic
manures, waterless urinals technology and the
watershed, etc.

Workshop for RRBs on Rural
Livelihood Technologies
Keeping in view the important role being played by
RRBs in the Rural Development especially in creating
rural employment, the workshop on village adoption
scheme and livelihood rural technologies was
organised during 22-23 May, 2015 to the regional
managers of RRBs to acquaint them with the various
livelihood opportunities that could be created for the
rural community through the technologies
showcased/displayed/demonstrated at RTP.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

During the workshop, NABARD, executed stalls were
also associated to enlighten the Bankers about the
various schemes available for the employment,
besides a power point presentation and interaction
with the technology partners to work out the
strategy for transfer of those technologies.

Workshop on Innovations in
Waste, Water and Energy
Technologies
A workshop in collaboration with BITS-PILANI,
Hyderabad campus was organised during 13-14 July,
2015 at BITS campus with the major theme of
highlighting the innovations in waste, water and
energy technologies that are relevant for Rural
Development aiming at providing insights on
prospectives on updates on current trends in the
above said areas leading to sustainable
development.
The major recommendations of the workshop are:
o

o

o

Bio-mass based poly generation technology
suitable for combined production of cold, heat
and power for storage and drying of
agricultural products in rural areas.
Cost-effective rain water harvesting
technology, both at the individual household
and community levels should be implemented
in those rural areas which receive decent
annual rainfall to address the problem of water
scarcity.
Application of geographical information
system and remote sensing technologies
would aid in foreseeing and planning for

various environmental issues and needs
including energy flow and its balance at the
rural community level.
o

There is an urgent need to utilise the
innovative technologies like solar based selfpower generating chullahs to meet the cooking
requirements at the rural areas particularly in
those places where supply of LPG is scarce.
Solar technologies can be used to preserve the
agricultural produce of the farmers.

o

High rate vermin composting of bio-waste with
local species of earthworms would be a good
option to handle the bio-mass as well as
production of organic manure.

o

Low-cost technologies that used indigenous
species of plants and materials for treatment
of liquid waste including municipal sewage like
SHEFROL can be designed appropriately and
used at rural areas. Such technologies could
be easily handled by the local people.

o

Solar Home Lighting is an important area for
Rural Development.

o

Innovations in multi-applications of solar
energy is the key. Hence, these technologies
should be roped in.

o

Rapid detection of contaminants in water is
imperative for rural health. Innovations in
simple to handle cost-effective sensors is a
must.

o

For the coastal villages that are having scarcity
of drinking water, cost-effective and robust
desalination technologies are to be used for
sea water purification and supply of good
quality portable water.

61

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Establishment of Rural Technology
Parks (RTPs) in Africa
During the year, a series of consultations were held
with MEA/MoRD with regard to the establishment
of RTPs in Zimbabwe and Ivory Coast. A feasibility
study by the NIRD&PR team consisting of
Dr. P. SivaRam and Dr. Y. Gangi Reddy along with Shri
Rajesh Bhushan, IAS., Joint Secretary, MoRD, GoI was
taken up during 17-25 May, 2015 at Ivory Coast and
the feasibility report was submitted in September,
2015, wherein depending upon the requirements of
Ivory Coast, the proposal for C-GARD and Rural Roads
was also included.
Further, a draft agreement with regard to the
Zimbabwe was submitted besides finalising the
budgetary financial proposals in consultation with
the officials of MEA who made a visit to RTP,
NIRD&PR for on the spot study.

Exposure Visits to the Students on
Rural Technologies
Encouraged the students from various schools to visit
RTP to acquaint them with the rural technologies,
the various schemes being implemented by the
Government for Rural Development, etc., to create
awareness among them.

programmes. Made efforts in promoting the RTP
activities through them in various States. This has
given impetus and from different States regular
enquiries are being received for guidance with regard
to the rural technologies and rural development
activities.
The students were also explained about the PG
Diploma courses being run by NIRD&PR and the
students have shown keen interest in those courses.

Solar Energy Promotion
During the year, in the process of promoting solar
energy, the following interventions were made:
a.

Facilitated Solar Street lighting for the NonGrid remote villages / tribal villages.

b.

Awareness programmes conducted for
promoting the solar energy applications for
livelihoods.

c.

Facilitated the starting of solar lantern
Assembling units / Service Centres.

d.

Organised workshop on renewable energy in
collaboration with BITS PILANI Hyderabad
Campus.

e.

Awareness programmes conducted for
fishermen community in collaboration with
NFDB on Solar Dehydration and Freezing /
Cooling Technologies.

f.

Facilitated fishermen with solar lanterns for
fishing in the nights in collaboration with
Berhampur University.

Study/Industrial Tours to RTP
Encouraged the study tours of the university/college
students from across the country and enlightened
them about the NIRD&PR and RTP activities/

62

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

g.

Training programmes conducted for rural
youth in the installation / maintenance and
assembling of solar street lights/ lanterns.

h.

Exhibited the RTP solar technologies in
various exhibitions organised by different
organisations institutions at Hyderabad.

i.

Demonstrations and dissemination of solar
technologies in respect of food processing
were conducted through mobile van project
in collaboration with NFDB.

j.

At the request of the Government of West
Bengal, RTP solar technologies were
transferred to three different centres in
Sundarban areas.

k.

l.

Presentation of solar activities of NIRD&PR at
FAPCII in the presence of H.E. Consulate
General of America.
Second Solar unit was started (VLE) with a
different technology/products.

Promotional Efforts for Organic
Farming
In order to promote and create greater awareness
on organic farming/manure, organised training
programmes to the farmers besides assisting the
institutions like National Police Academy, Kendriya
Vidyalaya, etc., in setting up vermin compost units
and training their personnel in the said technology.

‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan’/
Sanitation
In every training programme of RTP a session was
introduced for 90 minutes on sanitation/
open defecation/water conservation/energy
conservation/green energy. Open discussions with
regard to the situation obtaining in their places was
encouraged and suitable suggestions were given to
them to better the situation in their respective
places.

Assistance/Guidance to the
Village Community/Engineers, etc., in
Sustainable Housing Technologies
Conducted awareness programmes to the Civil
Engineers/Masons and construction workers on the
house building technologies with special emphasis
on mud blocks making.
At the request of the Villages/Panchayats/District
Administrations deputed the Civil Engineer of RTP
to various places in Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Andhra
Pradesh and Telangana for guiding the village
community in making the compressed mud blocks
and construction by the use of the said material and
in using the sustainable housing technologies in the
process of promoting the sustainable house building
technologies.
Assisted in the construction of low cost toilets using
the sustainable technologies in the States of
Karnataka, Telangana and Chhattisgarh.

63

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Facilitated the training to the prisoners of Kandi
central jail in the compressed mud blocks making.
Demonstration building was constructed at RTP
involving the masons from all over the country with
the assistance of MoRD under MGNREGA, a measure
to propagate for the transfer of those technologies
through those trainees.

Trainings at Different Prisons on
Livelihood Activities
Encouraged the visits of the technology partners to
train the prisoners in various livelihood activities
especially in food processing, making of home based
products, etc., so that the prisoners once they are
released from the jails after the completion of their
punishment period can have a respectable life with
the livelihood activities in which they are trained.

Promotion of the Research and
Development (R&D) Activity
The unit partners who have expertise in the
development of innovative products were
encouraged in making the improved machinery
which can reduce the drudgery of the rural
community. In this process, promoted the making
of mud block making machines, Ice making
machinery, solar based cooling and freezing
technologies besides displaying, demonstrating and
disseminating those technologies at different
locations.

64

Watershed Model
Establish a watershed model at RTP which explains
the situation of the village before the watershed
treatment and after the watershed treatment and
this model is well received by the visitors/
participants, etc. Even the Parliamentary
Consultative Committee/Standing Committee
members appreciated the effort.
To explain the effects of watershed, the pictures of
RTP right from 2003 -2015 are displayed/exhibited
which speaks of the greenery developed with the
implementation of watershed project at RTP. The
ICRISAT team who made an assessment had
complemented the live watershed and the result
achieved in the shape of greenery in the campus.

Capacity Building to the Tribal
Community
Special efforts were made for the capacity building/
skill development of the tribal community depending
upon their resources.
Keeping in view the availability of ‘Adda’ leaf, etc.,
freely in the forest area, training programmes were
organised in leaf plate/cups making for tribal
community from AP, Telangana and West Bengal.
Further, in the light of the abundant scope for
apiculture in the tribal areas, skill development
training programmes were conducted in the beekeeping activity with improved and hygienic
techniques.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Internship
The engineering students were provided Internship
facility in the following areas:
•

Sustainable House Building technologies

•

Rural Livelihood technologies

•

Food Processing through solar-dehydration
technologies

•

Renewable energy technologies

International Participants’ Exposure
to RTP
All the International participants of NIRD&PR were
given exposure at RTP on all the technologies
displayed at RTP. Discussions were held with them
on the technologies of their interest suitable for
transfer depending upon the need of the country and
given the necessary guidance.

Exposure to RTP to the Participants
of Other Training Institutions
The participants of various training programmes,
both National and International, from various ICAR
institutions, NIMSME, NAARM, MANAGE, NIPHM,
ASCI, etc., were given exposure to the RTP
technologies for half-a-day during their courses.

Trainings in Collaboration with
NGOs/Other Institutions
Observing the keen interest evinced by the NGOs like
‘Amrita Serve’ Initiative (Mata Amrutanandamayi
Mutt), Amma Foundation, Art of Living
representatives and RDT Ecology Centre, Anantapur
in promoting the livelihood activities in the villages
viz., Gudipati Cheruvu, Venkatampally, Krishnagiri
and Kodur in AP, Sriramnagar Chinchode and Kodur
in Telangana associated with them and imparted skill
development programmes in various livelihood
activities and continuing the efforts for strengthening
the collaboration.
Training programmes were conducted under ACABC
programme in collaboration with MANAGE,
Hyderabad.

Demonstration and Display of Rural
Technologies in Various Exhibitions
In the process of display and demonstration of rural
technologies for creating awareness on the same,
RTP participated in the various exhibitions viz., 104th
Edition of Indian Science Congress at Mysore,
NIPHM, National Institute of Rice Research, Prof.
Jayasankar Telangana State Agricultural University,
WALAMTARI, Pragati Maidan, etc., and displayed the
technologies.

Visitors
During the year, 9022 persons from different States,
villages, colleges, schools, organisations visited RTP.
Details of the category-wise visitors are given in
Tables 5 & 6.

65

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Table 1: Skill Development Training Programmes Organised During 2015-16
S. No. Name of the Programme

Date/s

Male

Female

Total

1

Training Course on Leaf Plate Making (BCM)

15-17 April, 2015

25

-

25

2

Training Course on Vermicomposting (BCM)

16-18 May, 2015

24

11

35

3

Training Course on Solar Street Light
Assembling

21-24 July, 2015

07

-

07

4

Training Course on Mud Blocks and Leaf
Plate Making

3-8 August, 2015

02

04

06

5

Training Course on Leaf Plate Making

6 - 21 August, 2015

--

32

32

6

Training Course on Solar Products
Assembling

10-22 August, 2015

29

13

42

7

Training Course on Soya Products

30 September to
3 October, 2015

02

27

29

8

Training Course on Home-Based Products

6 - 9 October, 2015

11

17

28

9

Training Course on Mushroom Cultivation
and Mushroom Products

13 - 16 October, 2015

13

02

15

10

Training Course on Leaf Plate Making

28 - 30 October, 2015

27

14

41

11

Training Course on Vermicomposting for
Telangana Police Department

2 - 3 Nov, 2015

07

-

07

12

Training Course on Vermicomposting for
Telangana Police Department

4 - 5 Nov, 2015

08

-

08

13

Training Course on Cost-effective Housing
Technologies and Mud Block Making

16-19 November, 2015

18

05

23

14

Training Course On Solar Street Lights
and Maintenance

30 Nov - 14 Dec, 2015

24

02

26

(Contd...)

66

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Table 1 (Contd...)
S. No. Name of the Programme

Date/s

Male

Female

Total

30 Nov to 2 Dec, 2016

10

-

10

11-14 Jan-16

5

9

14

15

Training cum Workshop for Established
Agripreneurs on Rural Enterprises

16

Training Course on Solar Street Lights and
Maintenance

17

Training Course on Leaf Plate Making

9 - 13 Feb, 2016

30

-

30

18

Training Course on Home-Based Products

16-19 Feb, 2016

08

14

22

19

Training Course on Vermicomposting and
Neem Products

17-19 Feb, 2016

15

03

18

20

Training Course on Cost-effective Housing
Technologies

24-27 Feb , 2016

25

04

29

21

Training Course on Workshop for
Agripreneurs on Rural Technologies

29 Feb to 2 March, 2016

16

0

16

22

Training Course on Handmade Paper
Bags Making

2 to 5 March, 2016

0

12

12

23

Training Course on Mushroom Cultivation
and Mushroom Products

3 to 5 March, 2016

11

08

19

24

Training Course on Leaf Plates Making

3 to 5 March, 2016

0

13

13

25

Training Course on Natural Dying

9 to 19 March, 2016

12

03

15

26

Training cum Exposure Visit on Housing
Technologies

28 March to 4 April

22

0

22

351

193

544

Total Number of Trainees

67

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Table 2: Exposure Visits
S. No. Name of the Programme

Date/s

Male

Female

Total

1.-2 April, 2015

10

14

24

1

Exposure Visit to Kothapally Village of
Vizianagaram District

2

Exposure Visit to Chinchodu Village,
Mahabubnagar District

16-17 June, 2015

12

10

22

3

Exposure Visit for Kothapally Village, WL

18-19 June, 2015

23

07

30

4

Exposure Visit for Koduru Village,
Visakhapatnam District

30 June to 1 July, 2015

04

18

22

5

Exposure Visit for Sangem Village,
Mahabubnagar District

1 – 2 July, 2015

34

-

34

6

Exposure Visit to ITDA, Bhadrachalam
of Khammam District

16 - 17 October, 2015

11

06

17

7

Exposure Visit to Venkannapuram, Nellore

5-6 November, 2015

33

-

33

8

Exposure Visit to Sri Ram Nagar, Moinabad

7 November

02

30

32

129

117

246

Date/s

Male

Female

Total

Total Number of Visitors

Table 3: Workshop
S. No. Name of the Programme
1

Workshop on Innovation in Waste,
Water and Energy Technologies in Rural
Development

13-14 July, 2015

22

8

30

2

Workshop on Rural Technologies for
Rural Youth of PTF

4 August, 2015

56

14

70

3

Workshop on Village Adoption and
Rural Technology

22-23 May, 2015

32

5

37

110

27

137

Total

68

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Table 4: Payment-based Skill Trainings by RTP Technical Partners
S. No.

Name of the Unit

Year

No. of Participants

1

Uttam Industries

2015-16

29

2

Bee-Keeping

12

3

Annapurna Cottage Industries

35

4

Handmade Paper Unit

05

5

Vermicomposting

01

Total Number of Participants

82

Table 5: Categories of Visitors to RTP
S.No.

Name of Organisation

Total

1

Visitors from Villages

900

2

Visitors from Schools

1926

3

Visitors from Colleges

2650

4

Institutional Visitors

1696

5

Visitors from NIRD&PR

1319

6

International Visitors

179

7

Official Visitors

337

8

Dignitaries

6

9

Hon’ble Ministers

9

Total

9022

69

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Table 6: Visits of Dignitaries to RTP

70

S. No.

Date

Dignitaries

1

13.6.2015

Shri Nihal Chand, Honble Union Minister of State for Panchayati Raj,
Government of India

2

26.6.2015

Shri Reddy Subramanyam, Joint Secretary, MoRD

3

17.7.2015

Smt. Meenakshi Rajagopal, IAS., Principal Secretary, Commissioner,
RD

4

7.9.2015

Dr Ramesh Deshpande, CEO, India Agriculture Group- International,
USA

5

18.11.2015

Visit of Parliamentary Consultative Committee

6

24.11.2015

Shri Amod K Kant, General Secretary, Pryayas JAC Society, New Delhi
(Ex-DGP Arunachal Pradesh)

7

28.1.2016

Visit of Namibian Delegation from Republic of Namibia

8

30.1.2016

Visit of Parliamentary Standing Committee

9

19.2.2016

Visit of Principal Secretary, Gujarat

10

19.3.2016

Visit of H.E. Achary Devavrath, Hon’ble Governor of Himachal
Pradesh

11

31.3.2016

Visit of Shri KN Kumar, Chief Executive, NFDB

12

6.8.2016

Shri T Lyngwa, Joint Secretary, Community and Rural Development
and Director, SIRD, Meghalaya

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Figure 1: Visits to RTP During 2015-16
Rural Technology Park Visitors During 2015-16

Other Institutions

NIRD&PR

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

January

February

March

Figure 2: Skilling at RTP During 2015-16
Rural Technology Park Training cum Exposure Visit
Exposure Visits

Workshops

NUMBERS

Skill Training

A

I
PR

L

AY
M

NE
JU

LY
JU

T
Y
R
H
ER
ER
ER
RY
R
C
BE
US
B
B
B
A
R
A
G
M
TO
A
EM
EM N U
RU
C
TE
AU
V
P
M
C
O
B
E
E
O
S
N
FE
D
JA

YEAR 2015-16

71

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Figure 3: Entrepreneurship Skill Training During 2015-16

No. of Trainees

Technology Partners Payment based Skill Training Programme during 2015-16

Solar Assembling (Thrive
Unit)
Mushroom
Mushroom
Cultivation
Cultivation

Vermi-composting

Soya Food Products
it)
Un

g
g
n
ts
ts
tin
tio
uc
uc
kin
s
a
a
d
d
o
o
e
M
po
tiv
Pr
Pr
e
riv
ul
m
t
h
d
C
o
d
a
e
(T
Pl
i-c
oo
m
as
F
f
g
o
m
b
a
n
r
a
i
e
ro
Le
bl
Ve
m
oy
sh
S
o
m
u
e
H
M
ss
A
lar
So

RTP Technology Partner

72

Leaf Plate Making
Homebased Products

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

In addition to training programmes, RTP has taken up the following new initiatives during
the year 2015-16:

Exhibition of Solar Technologies during the Workshop at BITS PILANI, Hyderabad Campus

Solar Street Lights Installation at Kiramal Village in Bihar

Solar Street Lights Installation at Narah Village in Bihar

Solar Assembling Unit in KADAPA, Andhra Pradesh

Solar Assembling Unit in Bhadrachalam, ITDA Area in
Khammam District of Telangana

Training Programme on Solar Lantern Assembling

Training Programme on Mud Blocks Making at RTP

73

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Delhi Public School Children’s Visit to RTP

Interaction with Mr Sridhar, Director VLE by Smt Chanda
Pandit, Registrar on the Occasion of Inauguration of Solar
Unit at RTP on 13.08.2015

Inauguration of VLE Solar Unit by Ms. Dave

Interaction with the villagers of Appapur Tribal village on
28.05.2015 by Shri T.L. Sankar, I A S (Rtd.) along with RTP
Team

Solar Home Lighting System Installed in Appapur
Habitation, (a remote tribal Chenchu village in Amrabad
Tiger reserve forest in Telangana

Visit of International Participants to RTP Units

74

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 10

ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES
Of these, 14 are female and the rest are male
students with varied educational
qualifications. The International candidates
are from Nigeria, Sudan, Vietnam, Ghana,
Indonesia, Iraq, Bangladesh, Myanmar and
Philippines.

Post Graduate Diploma in Rural
Development Management
(PGDRDM) – One-year Residential
Programme
In the year 2015-16, CPGS&DE conducted two
programmes of Post Graduate Diploma in Rural
Development Management (PGDRDM) concurrently.
The PGDRDM Batch – 10 started from 16th August
2015 and ends by 31st July 2016. The Batch-11 started
from 6th January, 2016 and will be completed by 31st
December, 2016.
1.

Forty seven students were admitted in the
PGDRDM: 2015-16 (Batch-10) from different
parts of India viz., Central India, Southern India,
North-East, Northern India, Eastern India while
nine International In-service students were
sponsored by International Organisations like
Afro Asian Rural Development Organisation
(AARDO) and Centre on Integrated Rural
Development for Asia and the Pacific (CIRDAP).

2.

Thirty seven students were admitted in the
PGDRDM: 2016 (Batch-11) from different parts
of India viz., Central India, Southern India,
North-East, Northern India, Eastern India. Of
these, 10 are female and the rest are male
students with varied educational
qualifications.

In both the Batches, nearly eight per cent students
represent the Farm Sciences (like agriculture,
horticulture, veterinary science),15 per cent the
Science stream, 25 per cent students represented
Arts and remaining 52 per cent represent the
professional courses like B.Tech, MBA, BBA, BCA, etc.
The selection of the Indian students was done on
the basis of All India Entrance Examination followed

75

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

by Group Discussion and Personal Interviews.

Curriculum
The three-Trimester Programme consists of a
classroom component, short and long field works,
Field Attachment (FA), examinations, including
periodical tests, assignments, project reports and
final examination. The classroom component was
spread over three trimesters and the FA component
was spread over six weeks in between Trimester – II
and Trimester – III. The Programme offers Courses
with a total of 52.5 credits.

Field Attachment (FA) and Rural
Organisational Internship
The six-week long FA and Rural Organisational
Internship was administered to the PGDRDM: Batch9 students during August 17 to October 1, 2015,
Batch-10 students from 1st March to 15th April, 2016

to sensitise the students to the hard core problems
of the rural society and its dynamics. The Internship
component focuses on institutions, organisational
structures, organisational culture, management
systems, HRD, finance, marketing, value addition,
etc. The organisations for field work included:
(i) Bharatiya Agro Industries Foundation(BAIF) (ii) CSV
Wardha (iii) Haryana State Rural Livelihoods Mission
(HSRLM) (iv) Infrastructure Leasing & Financial
Services Limited (IL&FS) (v) Jharkhand State
Livelihood Promotion Society (JSLPS) (vi) MYRADA
(vii) Odisha Livelihood Mission (OLM) Odisha,
(viii) Rajasthan State Rural Livelihood Mission
(RAJVEEKA) (ix) Rural Technology Park, NIRD&PR
(x) SIRD Meghalaya (xi) SERP, Telengana, (xiii) West
Bengal State Rural Livelihoods Mission (WBSRLM)
(xiv) Uttranchal State Rural Livelihood Mission
(USRLM) (xv) Meghalaya State Rural Livelihood
Mission (MSRLM) (xvi) Maharashtra State Rural
Livelihood Mission (MSRLM), (xvii) Assam State Rural
Livelihood Mission, (xviii) ICICI Foundation among
others.

Students of PGDRDM during their Field Visit

76

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Forum Presentations
As a part of the learning exercise, forum
presentations of the experts in the area of Rural
Development for the Tenth and Eleventh Batch
students of PGDRDM were organised as detailed
below:
1.

Dr. Dave Irvine-Halliday, Professor, Emeritus,
University of Calgary, Founder and Executive
Chairman, on 13th April 2015

2.

Shri S. M. Vijayanand, Secretary, Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj, Government
of India

3.

Shri K. Rajeswar Rao, IAS, Principal Secretary
to Chief Minister, Tripura, Government of
Tripura, on 21st July 2015

4.

Professor G. Rama Chandrudu, Former Dean,
CDC and Former Director of Academic Staff
College. Presently Sr. Fellow, Economic
Department, Andhra University on 20th
October 2015

5.

Dr. K. V. Achalapathi, Professor of Commerce
& Additional Director, Directorate of
Placement Services, Osmania University,
Hyderabad on 19th January 2016

6.

Shri R.C.M. Reddy, Managing Director,
Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services
Limited (IL&FS), New Delhi, etc.

Shri R.C.M. Reddy, IAS, Managing Director, (IL&FS)

PGDRDM: 2015-16 (Batch-9)
Placement Scenario
PGDRDM: 2014-15 (Batch-8) placements were held
during 27th April, 2015 to 2nd May 2015. The
placement event for Batch-9 was held during
October 26th to 31st, 2015. Reputed organisations
participated in the campus placement event. Of the
35 PGDRDM students who have joined PGDRDM:
Batch-9, placements were provided to all the
students. The organisations those participated in the
Placement Programme of both the batches are
(i) DDUGKY (ii) IL&FS (iii) Jharkhand State Livelihood
Promotion Society (JSLPS) (iv) Odisha Livelihood
Mission, (v) BRLPs (vi) Rajasthan SRLM (vii) ICA
(viii) Disah Foundation (ix) Meghalaya SRLM, etc.

Diploma Awarding Ceremony for
PGDRDM-2014: Batch-9
Diploma Awarding Ceremony of NIRD & PR PGDRDM
Batch-9, 2015 was held on January 9th 2016.

77

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Shri. J. Raymond Peter, IAS, Chief Commissioner of
Land Administration (CCLA), Government of
Telangana, Hyderabad was the Chief Guest of the
occasion. Shri S. M. Vijayanand, IAS, Director General
& Chairman, Academic Committee, NIRD&PR,
PGDRDM presided over the Diploma Awarding
Ceremony.

•

A Mobile Application Service for Young
Learners

•

Provita (A Low Cost Energy Food for the
Growing Children)

•

Manufacturing of Rubber Products at Agartala
(Gloves, Eraser, Rubber Band)

•

An online services for Tourism in North-east
India

•

Manufacturing of Organic Ginger Paste,
Powder and Dehydrated Ginger in Arunachal
Pradesh

Shri J. Raymond Peter, IAS & Shri S. M. Vijayanand,
IAS, Secretary, MoPR, GoI during Diploma Awarding
Ceremony

Collaborative Two-year M. Tech
Programme on Appropriate Technology
and Entrepreneurship (ATE)
The centre organised two-year M. Tech Programme
on Appropriate Technology and Entrepreneurship
(ATE) in collaboration with National Institute of
Technology, Arunachal Pradesh. Five students of
second batch are pursuing their third and fourth
semesters of the Programme which will conclude in
May 2016. During their stay at NIRD&PR, the
students worked on themes and products that
included:

78

Dr. W.R. Reddy, IAS, Director General, NIRD&PR with
M.Tech Students

Distance Education Courses
As per the recommendations of the Alagh
Committee for restructuring of NIRD&PR and
formation of schools and centres, the erstwhile
Distance Education Cell was merged with Centre for
Post Graduate Studies with a new name of the centre
as Centre for PG Studies and Distance Education.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CPGS&DE offers the following
Distance Mode Courses:

No. of Students Enrolled in Distance Mode
Programmes - Year-wise
Courses

•

One-Year Post Graduate Diploma in
Sustainable Rural Development

•

One-Year Post Graduate Diploma in Tribal
Development Management (PGDTDM)

•

One-Year Post Graduate Diploma in Geospatial Technology Applications in Rural
Development (PGDGARD)

Year
2015

2016

PGDSRD

142

184

PGDTDM

33

40

PGDGARD

-

124

Students Enrolled During 2015 & 2016

PGDSRD

PGTDM

Student Support Service
The centre provides support to students in their
learning and related issues including supply of course
material to the students, which is sent by post and
through email. Students can download the course
material which is sent by mail. The course materials
in PDF format are user-friendly as the contents of

PGDGARD

these materials can be downloaded and accessed via
different platforms like Smart phone, i-Pad, tablets,
laptop, etc. Contact Sessions were conducted at
study centres which was followed by Semester End
Examinations (1st Semester in July and 2nd Semester
in December) every year.

79

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Contact Sessions and Semester end Examinations of PGDSRD Students

PGDGARD Students in Lab Session and Semester end Examinations

Development of E-Modules

Workshops/Meetings

Two E-Modules, one on Integrated Watershed
Management and another on Fresh Water Fisheries
& Fish Farming in India were developed during the
year.

A review meeting was conducted by Distance
Education Cell in February, 2016 at NIRD&PR to
review the existing printed course material of
PGDSRD.

80

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 11
NIRD&PR - NOR
TH-EASTERN
NORTH-EASTERN
TI
REGION
AL CENTRE, GUWAHA
REGIONAL
GUWAHATI
Introduction
The North-Eastern Regional Centre of the National
Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj

(NIRD&PR-NERC) was established in July 1983 at
Guwahati with the aim to orient its training and
research activities to the specific needs and potential
of North-Eastern States of India.

Shri Sudarshan Bhagat, Hon’ble Minister of State for Rural Development Visiting NIRD&PR-NERC,
Guwahati Campus

81

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Mandate
a.

Conduct training programmes, conferences,
seminars and workshops for senior
development executives.

b.

Undertake, aid, promote and coordinate
research on it’s own or through other agencies.

c.

Analyse and provide solutions to problems
encountered in planning and implementation
of the programmes for rural development,
natural resource management, decentralised
governance, IT applications, Panchayati Raj
and related issues

d.

Trainings/Workshops/Sewminars
Key Clientele Group
•

Government Officials at State, district and
block levels

•

NGO executives

•

Elected Representatives

•

Academicians, etc.

Disseminate information through periodicals,
reports and other publications in furtherance
of the basic objectives of the Institute.

Participants of a Training Programme with the Director and NERC Faculty

82

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Types Of Clients/ Participants (2015-16)
S. No.

Categories of Participants

No. of Participants in Each Category

1

Government officials

2

ZP/ PRIs/VDB/VC functionaries

47

3

Representatives of Voluntary Organisations

29

4

Scholars from National & State level Institutes

122

5

Faculties/ officials from Universities/ Colleges

286

6

Others

27 1

Total

1893

Focus Areas of Training/
Workshop/Seminar During 2015-16
•

Rural Livelihoods

•

Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY)

•

Swachh Bharat Mission

•

Double Entry Accounting System for Rural
Development Programmes

•

Planning and Management of Watershed
Programmes

•

Geo-Spatial Technologies

•

e-Governance and Open Source ICT
Applications

1138

•

Integrated District Planning

•

Horticulture and Animal Husbandry

•

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS)

•

Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)

•

Rural Entrepreneurship
Programme

•

Research Methodology

•

Natural Resource Management

•

Make in India and Rural North East

•

Management Development Programme

Development

83

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Interaction with IAY beneficiaries at a village under Bankakata GP, Kamrup (R) District, Assam

Highlights of Training
Interventions During 2015-16
Sixty three programmes including three workshops
and five seminars were conducted involving 1893
participants with an average participation exceeding
30 participants per programme. Female participation
per programme is about 10. Eleven off-campus

S. No.

84

Categories of Programmes

programmes were conducted at the various SIRDs
in the region. Out of 63 programmes conducted, 50
were NIRD&PR approved programmes and rest 13
programmes come under sponsored category. Prime
sponsoring agencies for training programmes were
Government of Meghalaya and SLNA (IWMP),
Government of Assam.

No. of Programmes
conducted

No. of Participants
attended

1

NIRD&PR

50

1560

2

Sponsored

13

333

Total

63

1893

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CATEGORIES OF PARTICIPANTS 2015-16

GENDER-WISE PARTICIPANTS

Government officials
ZP/PRI/VDB/VC
Voluntary
Organisations
National / State level
Trg. & Res. Institutes
Universities/
Colleges
Others

Chart 1: Categories of participants (2015-16)

Chart 2: Gender-wise participants (2015-16)

A computer practical session during an ICT training
programme

A group activity of participants during a training
programme

Research Including Consultancy
•

•

NERC undertakes research on area-specific
problems of North-Eastern Region.
NERC has been undertaking both diagnostic
and programme-oriented Research Studies in
different States of this region.

Focus Areas of Research
During 2015-16
•

IWMP DPRs and Evaluation

•

Promotion of rural entrepreneurship

•

Promotion of rural livelihoods

•

GIS based Infrastructure data bank for NE
States

85

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

•

Village adoption studies

•

District Planning for Autonomous District
Councils

•

Self-Governance under Panchayati Raj System

PRA Exercise being conducted at a village, Morigaon district, Assam

Highlights of Research Interventions
During 2015-16
Altogether 19 research studies under the categories
of NIRD&PR, Consultancy and Action Research were

86

undertaken of which 12 have been completed and
7 are in various stages of completion during 201516. The status of these research projects is given
below:

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

A.

Research/Action Research Studies Completed
i.

S. No.

NIRD&PR Studies Completed (2015-16): 04
Name of the Research Project

Date of
Initiation

Date of
Completion

Project
Director/ Team

Sponsoring
Agency

1

Success Story of Cleanest Village of
Asia: A Study of Mawlynnong Village
in Meghalaya

March
10, 2015

June
30, 2015

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. M.K. Shrivastava

NIRD&PR

2

A Case Study of District Planning
Under Autonomous District
Councils (ADCs)

January
11, 2016

March
30, 2016

Dr. M.K. Shrivastava
Dr. R.M. Pant

NIRD&PR

3

Integration and Function of
Institutions of Self-governance under
Panchayati Raj System: A Case of
Lachen and Lachung Villages in
North Sikkim

January
11, 2016

March
30, 2016

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. M.K. Shrivastava

NIRD&PR

4

Development of GIS based
Infrastructure Data Bank for NE States

April, 2015

June, 2015

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

NIRD&PR

Project
Director/ Team

Sponsoring
Agency

Ii.

Consultancy Studies Completed (2015-16): 06

S. No.

Name of the Research Project

Date of
Initiation

Date of
Completion

1

Evaluation of 46 IWMP PPRs of
Batch-VII (2015-16), Assam

27/03/2015

July, 2015

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

SLNA, IWMP,
Assam

2

Evaluation of 50 IMWP DPRs of
Batch-IV (2012-13), Assam

27/03/2015

Aug, 2015

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

SLNA, IWMP,
Assam

3

Evaluation of Consolidation
Phase Activities of 22 IWMP Batch - I
Projects in 11 Districts of Nagaland

08/09/2014

Aug, 2015

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

SLNA, IWMP,
Nagaland

(Contd...)

87

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Date of
Initiation

Date of
Completion

Project
Director/ Team

Sponsoring
Agency

4

GIS Support for Preparation of IWMP
DPR - Kokrajhar-17, Tipkai West

22/05/2015

Nov, 2015

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. NSR Prasad

WCDC,
Kokrajhar
Soil
Conservation
Division

5

GIS Support for Preparation of
Database & Maps for IWMP
Projects under Baksa District,
Assam

06/02/2105

Sep, 2015

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. N.S.R. Prasad
Mr. A. Simhachalam

WCDC, Baksa
Soil
Conservation
Division

6

GIS Support for Preparation of
IWMP DPR - Kokrajhar -18,
Lower Silai

04/05/2015

Nov, 2015

Dr. K. Haloi
Mr. A. Simhachalam

WCDC,
Kokrajhar
Soil
Conservation
Division

iii.
S. No.

88

Name of the Research Project

Action Research Completed (2015-16): 02
Name of the Research Project

Date of
Initiation

Date of
Completion

Project
Director/ Team

Sponsoring
Agency

1

Promotion of rural entrepreneurship
and enterprises through livelihood
cluster approach: A pilot initiative
in action research

Nov, 2014

Aug, 2015

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. Ratna Bhuyan

NIRD&PR,
Hyderabad

2

Promotion of rural livelihoods
through effective utilisation of water
resources by adopting advanced
Pisciculture Practices in Kathora
revenue village of Nalbari district,
Assam

Oct, 2014

Feb, 2016

Dr. K. Haloi
Mr. A. Simhachalam

NFDB,
Hyderabad

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

On field intervention at Cane and Bamboo Technology Centre, Meghalaya

B.

Research/Action Research/Consultancy Studies In Progress
i.

S. No.

NIRD&PR Studies In Progress (2015-16): 03
Name of the Research Project

Date of
Initiation

Date of
Completion

Project
Director/ Team

Sponsoring
Agency

1

Village Adoption Study (Hatiutha
Revenue Village, Morigaon District)

Mar, 2013

Ongoing

Dr. K. Haloi

NIRD&PR, Hyd

2

Village Adoption Study (Kathora
Revenue Village, Nalbari District)

Mar, 2013

Ongoing

Dr. K. Haloi
Mr. A. Simhachalam

NIRD&PR, Hyd

3

Village Adoption Study (Jajikona
Revenue Village, Kamrup
Rural District)

Mar, 2013

Ongoing

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. M.K Shrivastava

NIRD&PR, Hyd

89

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ii.
S. No.

Consultancy Studies In Progress (2015-16): 02
Name of the Research Project

Date of
Initiation

Date of
Completion

Project
Director/ Team

1

Work Phase Evaluation of 19
Batch-2 IWMP projects, Nagaland

01/06/2015

Ongoing

Dr. K. Haloi

SLNA, IWMP,
Assam

2

TSI for three BRGF districts of
Meghalaya (2011-16 to 2016-17)

Oct, 2011

Ongoing

Dr. K. Haloi

DC, Ri-Bhoi, DC,
W.G.Hills & DC,
SG Hills Districts

iii.

Action Research In Progress (2015-16): 02

S. No.

Name of the Research Project

Date of
Initiation

Date of
Completion

Project
Director/ Team

1

Facilitation of Hatiutha Village
Development Plan: An Initiative
under Village Adoption Study

Sept, 2014

Ongoing

Dr. K. Haloi

NIRD&PR,
Hyderabad

2

Facilitation of Kathora Village D
evelopment Plan: An initiative
under Village Adoption Study

Sept, 2014

Ongoing

Dr. K. Haloi

NIRD&PR,
Hyderabad

Participants visiting a vermicompost unit of RRTC, Meghalaya

90

Sponsoring
Agency

Sponsoring
Agency

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Publications
Books Published During 2015-16
S. No

Name of the book

Name of the
Publisher/ ISBN No.

Author (s)

1

Development Perspectives in
North East India: A Holistic Overview

Akansha Publishing House,
New Delhi
(ISBN-978-81-8370-461-8)
(in print)

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. M.K. Shrivastava

2

Women Empowerment in North

Lakshi Publishers & Distributors,

Edited by

East India: The Context and Concerns

New Delhi
ISBN-978-93-82120-91-9

Dr. M.K.Shrivastava

Papers/Articles Published During 2015-16
S. No.

1

Name of the Paper/ Article

Name of the Journal/Newspaper/ Author (s)
Book/ ISBN No.

GIS based Evaluation of Natural
Resources of Yikhum Micro Watershed

Geoinformatics Applications
Dr. K. Haloi
for Natural Resource Management, Dr N.S.R. Prasad

under IWMP in Wokha District,
Nagaland

published by Professional Books
Publisher with
ISBN No. 978-93-85506-06-2

Mr. A. Simhachalam

2

Ishwar ke bagiche Mawlynnong me (Hindi)

Published in Opinion Post,
Nov 1-15, 2015, New Delhi

Dr. R.M. Pant

3

Dreams of Act East Policy through
privatisation of developmental activities
in Arunachal Pradesh

Paper published in the book,
‘Look East Policy-Perspectives
from the South East Asian

Dr. R.M. Pant
Asha Nanding
S. Choudhury

Architecture’ edited
by A Bhattacharjee., published
by Excel India Publication,
New Delhi (2015)

(Contd...)

91

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

4

Name of the Paper/ Article

Name of the Journal/Newspaper/ Author (s)
Book/ ISBN No.

Marketing of Rural Development Schemes

Paper presented as ‘Keynote

for development of North Eastern

lecture’ and published in the

Region of India

proceedings of UGC-SAP

Dr. R.M. Pant

National Seminar on achieving
Sustainable Rural Livelihood
through ‘Financial Interventions
and Skilling India with special
reference to the NER’, published
by Department of Management,
Tezpur University.
(March 4-5, 2016)
5

Assam: New Opportunities

Paper presented as ‘Key note

Dr. R.M. Pant

speech’ and published in the book
‘Turn mirrors into windows:
Rhetoric of Act East Policy &
beyond’, edited by Amit
Choudhury
6

Women entrepreneurship in Arunachal:

Published by Akanksha Publishing

Sunshine in the clouds in “Development

House, New Delhi

Perspectives in North East India: A Holistic

(ISBN-978-81-8370-461-8)

Overview” edited by Dr. R.M. Pant &

(in print)

Dr. R.M. Pant

Dr. M.K. Shrivastava

(Contd...)

92

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

7

Name of the Paper/ Article

Name of the Journal/Newspaper/ Author (s)
Book/ ISBN No.

Growth of Public-private Sectors through

Published in “Development

Dr. R.M. Pant

Infusion of Technical Manpower:

Perspectives in North East India:

S. Choudhury and

A Strategic Approach to Arunachal

A Holistic Overview”, edited by

Sandeepa Dutta

Pradesh

Dr. R.M. Pant &
Dr. M.K Shrivastava, Published
by Akanksha Publishing House,
New Delhi
(ISBN-978-81-8370-461-8)
(in print)

8

Site Suitability Analysis for Water

Integrated Land Use Planning for

Harvesting Structures in Watershed

Sustainable Agriculture and Rural

Using Geo-Informatics

Development, published by

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

Apple Academic Press, Inc USA with
ISBN No. 13: 978-1-77188-198-2
9

10

Geomatics for Studying the Temporal ka

Integrated Land Use Planning for

Changes in Land Use Land Cover: A Case

Sustainable Agriculture and Rural

Study of Sindhuvallipura Watershed,

Development, published by Apple

Nanjangud Taluk, Mysore District,

Academic Press, Inc USA with

Karnataka

ISBN No. 13: 978-1-77188-198-2

Knowledge Management Initiative Through

Integrated Land Use Planning for

Agriculture Sector Through Agro Climatic

Sustainable Agriculture and Rural

Planning and Information Bank (APIB)

Development, published by Apple

for Land Resources Development

Academic Press, Inc USA with

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

ISBN No. 13: 978-1-77188-198-2

(Contd...)

93

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

11

Name of the Paper/ Article

Name of the Journal/Newspaper/ Author (s)
Book/ ISBN No.

Matriliny in North East India and

Women Empowerment in North

Dynamics of Women Empowerment

East India: The Context and

Dr. M.K. Shrivastava

Concern, Edited by
Dr. M. K. Shrivastava
Lakshi Publishers & Distributors,
New Delhi
ISBN-978-93-82120-91-9
12

Geo-Informatics Lab Practice (GLP)

Distance Education Cell,

(Book Chapter, Block 2, 3 & 4)

NIRD&PR, Hyderabad

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

Concluding Ceremony of Hindi Week held at NERC during September 16-23, 2015

94

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Seminars/ Workshops/ Conferences/ Meetings Attended by Faculty
Members and Officers of NIRD&PR-NERC Organised by Other Institutes/
Universities/ Departments/Agencies during 2015-16

S. No.

Name of the Seminar/Workshop/
conference/meeting

Institute/ Venue/
organiser with date

Faculty/
Officer

Purpose of
Attending

Seminar
1

National Seminar on “Vision Document
for Scheduled and Scheduled Tribes of
North East India”, Organised by
Kalyan Ashram, Assam

Silpgram,
Guwahati, Assam
7-9 August 2015

Dr. R.M. Pant

Spl. Invitee

2

Achieving Sustainable Rural Livelihood
through Financial Intervention and
Skilling India with Special Reference

Tezpur University,
Guwahati
4 March, 2016

Dr. R.M. Pant

Guest Speaker

Dr. M. K Shrivastava Paper presentation
and Moderation
of Session

to the North-Eastern Region
3

National Seminar on “Vision Document
for Scheduled and Scheduled Tribes of
North-East India”

Kalyan Ashram
Assam at Silpgram,
Guwahati, Assam
7-9 August 2015

4

National Seminar on “Rural Sanitation
in India: Achievement, Trends &
Challenges”

NIRD&PR,
Dr. M. K Shrivastava Paper presentation
Hyderabad
and Session Chair
27-29 January 2016

5

National Seminar on ‘Natural Resource

NIRD&PR-NERC,

Management: Technological
Issues and Options’

Guwahati
18-19 March 2016

National Seminar on “Indigenous
Knowledge System for Sustainable
Rural Development”

NIRD&PR-NERC,
Dr. M. K Shrivastava Organised and
Guwahati
paper presented
18-19 January 2016

6

Dr. M. K Shrivastava Organised and
paper presented

(Contd...)

95

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Name of the Seminar/Workshop/
conference/meeting

Institute/ Venue/
organiser with date

Faculty/
Officer

Purpose of
Attending

Workshop
1

Special Workshop on “ Gram Panchayat
Development Plan for North Eastern
States”, Organised by Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, Government of India

NIRD&PR- NERC,
Guwahati
28-30 Sept. 2015

Dr. R.M. Pant

Invitee

2

Workshop on “Initiatives Towards

NIRD&PR-NERC

Dr. R.M. Pant

Spl. Invitee

Building Model Village In
North-East India"

Guwahati
11-12 March, 2016

3

2nd SIRD-NIRD&PR, Ghy Conclave

SIRD, Sikkim
14-15 March, 2016

Dr. R.M. Pant

Chairperson

4

Workshop on Gram Panchayat
Development Plan

Panchayati Raj
Dr. N.S.R. Prasad
Training Institute,
Agartala, Tripura,
3-4 December, 2015

Guest Speaker &
Paper Presentation

5

Regional Workshop on Space Based
Information Support for Decentralised
Planning

NESAC, Umiam,
Shillong
7 December, 2015

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

Invitee

6

Workshop on Procurement
Process and Software

NEDFi, House,
Guwahati NIC,
1 June, 2015

Mr. S.K Ghosh

Arupjyoti Sarma
Invitee

7

Workshop on “Development of
Case Studies in

NIRD&PR,
Hyderabad

Dr. M. K Shrivastava Module
Development

Rural Development”

5-9 Sept. 2015

Special Workshop on “ Gram Panchayat
Development Plan for North-Eastern
States”,

Ministry of
Panchayati Raj,
Government of
India at NIRD&PRNERC, Guwahati
28-30 Sept. 2015

8

Dr. M. K Shrivastava Participation

(Contd...)

96

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Name of the Seminar/Workshop/
conference/meeting

Institute/ Venue/
organiser with date

Faculty/
Officer

Purpose of
Attending

Conference
1

International Conference on
“Raise with East”

University of
Science and
Technology,
Meghalaya
26-27 February,
2016

Dr. R.M Pant

Panelist and
Chaired the session

2

International Conference on
“Development –Induced Displacement
and Migration, Land Acquisition
and Resettlement”

Centre for
Development
Studies,
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
with International
Development
Research Centre
(IDRC)
3-4 March 2016

Dr. M. K Shrivastava Paper Presentation

Meeting
1

“Preparation of Gram Panchayat Level
Plan” Organised by Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, Government of India

NIRD&PR- NERC,
Guwahati
6 June 2015

Dr. R.M. Pant

Invitee

2

E-Naga Summit organised by
Department of IT and Communication,
Government of Nagaland

Kohima, Nagaland
15 May, 2015

Dr. R.M. Pant

Panelist and
Resource Person

3

Progress Review of Ph.D. Scholar

USTM,
18 August, 2015

Dr. R.M. Pant

As external expert

4

Multi Stake-Holders Himalayan
Sustainable Development Forum (HSDF) :
Organised by GBPHED,
Kosi-Katarmal, Almora

National
Consultation,
at NIRD&PR-NERC,
Guwahati
5 October, 2015

Dr. R.M. Pant

Delivered lecture /
Panelist

(Contd...)

97

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Name of the Seminar/Workshop/
conference/meeting

Institute/ Venue/
organiser with date

Faculty/
Officer

5

Evaluation of Summer Internship
Project (SIP) Report

Tezpur University
Department of
Business
Administration,
NAPAAM, Assam
6 November, 2015

6

Departmental Promotion Committee
Meeting

Brahmaputra
Dr. R.M. Pant
Board, River
Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation,
Ministry of Water
Resources, Govt.
of India, Basistha,
Guwahati,
19 November, 2015

Member

7

Launching of “Assam State Action Plan
on Environment” by Department of
Environment and Forest, Govt. of Assam

19 November, 2015 Dr. R.M. Pant

Member
Consultative Group

8

Multi Stake-Holders Himalayan
Sustainable Development Forum (HSDF):
National Consultation by GBPHED

India Habitat Centre, Dr. R.M. Pant
New Delhi
29-30 Dec, 2015

Resource Person
and Guest of Honour

9

Prospects & Future of Higher Education,
Organised by Indira Gandhi
Vishwavidyalaya, Raipur

Raipur
20-21 January,
2016

Keynote speech
and Panelist

10

Invitation for the Event on EMC in
Gram Micro and Wizertech

EMC and Wizertech, Dr. R.M. Pant
Guwahati,
18 March, 2016

Invitee

11

Indian Innovation Growth Programme

Organised by DST
& FICCI at
Vishwaratna Hotel,
Guwahati
8 February, 2016

Invitee

Dr. R.M. Pant

Dr. R.M. Pant

Dr N.S.R. Prasad

Purpose of
Attending
External Examiner

(Contd...)

98

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Name of the Seminar/Workshop/
conference/meeting

Institute/ Venue/
organiser with date

Faculty/
Officer

Purpose of
Attending

12

HP Technology Day

Elite Computers
and Communications, Hotel
Gateway Grandeur
28 July 2015

Mr. S.K Ghosh

14

“ Preparation of Gram
Panchayat Level Plan”

Ministry of
Panchayati Raj,
Government of
India at NIRD&PRNERC, Guwahati
6 June 2015

Dr. M. K Shrivastava Participation

Invitee

A Seminar proceeding in progress at Dr. A.P.J Abdul Kalam Hall, NERC

99

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Papers Presented by Faculty Members of NIRD&PR-NERC During 2015-16
S. No.

Name of the
paper

Institute
where
presented

Date of
presentation

Name of the
seminar/ workshop

Faculty/ officer

1

Application of Geospatial
Technologies for Gram
Panchayat Development
Plans

Panchayati Raj
Training
Institute
Agartala,
Tripura

3-4 December,
2015

Workshop on
“Gram Panchayat
Development Plan”

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

2

Assessment of Drinking
Water and Sanitation
facilities using
Geoinformatics: A case
of Kathora revenue
village, Nalbari District,
Assam

NIRD&PR,
NERC

6-7 January,
2016

National Seminar on
"Geoinformatics
Applications in Rural
Development"

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

3

Usage of mSBM
NIRD&PR,
Application under Swachh Hyderabad
Bharat Mission in North
East India – Status
and Issues

27-29 January,
2016

National Seminar on
“Rural Sanitation in
India: Achievements,
Trends & Challenges”

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

4

Application of Geospatial
Technologies for
Irrigation Management

NIRD&PR,
Guwahati

27-29 January,
2016

Regional Workshop on
Water Use Efficiency
and Equity through
participatory Irrigation
Management (NWM,
MoWR)

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

5

GIS based Evaluation of
Natural Resources of
Yikhum Micro
Watershed under
IWMP in Wokha
District, Nagaland

NIRD&PR,
Hyderabad

National Seminar on
“Geoinformatics
Applications for
Natural Resource
Management”

Dr. N.S.R. Prasad

(Contd...)

100

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Name of the
paper

Institute
where
presented

Date of
presentation

Name of the
seminar/ workshop

Faculty/ officer

6

MGNREGA &Natural
Resource Management

Kalyan Ashram
Assam
at Silpgram,
Guwahati
Assam

7-9 August
2015

National Seminar on
“Vision Document for
Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes of
North East India”

Dr. M. K Shrivastava

7

Case of Mawlynnong
in Meghalaya

NIRD&PR,
Hyderabad

27-29 January
2016

National Seminar on
“Rural Sanitation in
India: Achievement,
Trends & Challenges”

Dr. M. K Shrivastava

8

Conservation and
NIRD&PR-NERC, 18-19 March
Regeneration of Natural
Guwahati
2016
Resources with MGNREGS:
A Menu of Options

National Seminar on
‘Natural Resource
Management:
Technological Issues
and Options’

Dr. M. K Shrivastava

9

Integration of Indigenous
Knowledge in Rural
Development
Programmes: Issues
and Challenges

NIRD&PR-NERC, 18-19 January
Guwahati
2016

National Seminar on
Dr. M. K Shrivastava
“Indigenous Knowledge
System for Sustainable
Rural Development”

10

Case Study on the
Cleanest Village of
Asia- Mawlynnong

NIRD&PR,
Hyderabad

5-9 September Workshop on
2015
“Development of
Case Studies in Rural
Development”

Dr. M. K Shrivastava

11

Laws of Land Acquisition
in Assam and its
Implication on
Land Security of
Tribals

Centre for
Development
Studies,
Thiruvananthapuram,
Kerala

3-4 March
2016

Dr. M. K Shrivastava

International
Conference on
“Development –
Induced Displacement
and Migration,
Land Acquisition and
Resettlement”

101

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Visit of Union Minister for Rural Development, Panchayati Raj and
Drinking Water & Sanitation

Hon’ble Union Minister Shri Birender Singh addressing media persons at NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati

Chaudhary Birender Singh, Hon’ble Union Minister
for Rural Development, Panchayati Raj and Drinking
Water & Sanitation visited NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati
and addressed a Press Conference held on June 10,
2015 at Conference Hall–III of the Institute.
Shri Rockybul Hussain, Minister for Panchayat &
Rural Development, Govt. of Assam also
accompanied the Union Minister. All print and
electronic media based in Guwahati were present in
the press conference. Shri Singh interacted with
media persons and briefed them about Saansad
Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) and implementation
status in North-East India. The Minister informed the
gathering that 40 MPs from both Lok Sabha and Rajya
Sabha of North-east have already selected villages
in their respective constituencies which are to be
developed as model villages under the scheme.

102

Dr. R.M Pant, Director, NERC felicitated the Hon’ble
Union Minister with a traditional Sarai and Assamese
gamocha during his short interaction with the
Minister at his chamber. Hon’ble Minister Shri Singh
appreciated the contribution of NERC and admired
its neat and clean campus.

Meeting on "Preparation of Gram
Panchayat Development Plan"
A meeting on the preparation of Gram Panchayat
Development Plan was held on June 6, 2015 at
NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati. The meeting was chaired
by Shri S.M. Vijayanand, IAS, Secretary, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, Government of India and Director
General, NIRD&PR. Senior officers from Panchayati
Raj and Rural Development departments from
Sikkim, Tripura, Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

participated in the meeting. Faculty members of
NERC also attended the day-long deliberation.
Dr. R.M. Pant, Director, NIRD&PR-NERC initiated the
proceedings of the meeting. Shri Vijayanand made a
presentation suggesting different steps involved in
developing Gram Panchayat Plan including
preparatory arrangement, identifying resource

involvement, environment creation, situation
analysis, projectisation, vetting of the plan, capacity
building, administrative and technical support
besides all other related issues. He interacted with
participants to review the status of preparation in
the participating States.

Shri S.M. Vijayanand, Secretary, MoPR, Govt. of India
& Director General, NIRD&PR addressing the
delegates

Representatives from participating States with
Secretary, MoPR, GoI

SLO Visits to SIRDs
The faculties of NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati who are
also the State Link Officers (SLO) for various State
Institutes of Rural Development (SIRD), visited
respective SIRDs under their charge to understand
Gap, review of Action Taken Report and to facilitate
the SIRDs' training and related activities. They have
also discussed with SIRD officials, matters related to

training programmes, research studies and
documentation like increase in the number of
training programmes for RD& PR target groups and
also deliberated upon the follow-up actions
consequent upon decisions taken in the 28th
Colloquium of SIRDs held at NIRD&PR, Hyderabad in
June, 2015. Besides, discussions were held on issues
related to the duties and responsibilities of the State
Link Officers (SLOs) and future course of action in
this regard.

103

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Dr. M. K. Shrivastava, SLO discussing activities of
BIPARD at Patna with Smt Smita Sinha, Assistant
Director

A view of SIRD, Nagaland

The SLOs of the regional centre visited their respective SIRDs as per the following schedule:
S. No.

Name of the SLO

SIRD Visited

Date of Visit

1

Dr. M.K Shrivastava

BIPARD, Bihar

7-9 September, 2015

2

Dr. Ratna Bhuyan

SIRD, Nagaland

10-11 September, 2015

3

Dr. R.M Pant

SIRD, Uttarakhand

11-12 September, 2015

4

Dr. K. Haloi

SIRD, Assam

2 & 8 September, 2015

5

Dr. N.S.R Prasad

SIRD, Sikkim

14 September, 2015

Second NIRD&PR and North-Eastern
SIRDs Conclave 2016
The second NIRD&PR and NE SIRDs' Conclave was
held at SIRD, Sikkim during March 14-15, 2016. The
Conclave involved discussions on issues faced by NE
SIRD’s and sharing of their Best Practices, field visit

104

to one of the best performing GPUs of Sikkim
(Mellidara Paiyong GPU) and an interaction with the
Hon’ble Minister, Secretary and Section Heads of
Rural Management & Development Department
(RM&DD), Government of Sikkim. The Conclave was
attended by representatives of all the North-Eastern
SIRDs except Tripura.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Delegates of the Conclave

The Inauguration of the Conclave which was
chaired by Dr. R. M. Pant, Director, NIRD&PR-NERC,
Guwahati, commenced with the lighting of
the ceremonial lamp by Dr. Pant, Dr. R.P. Achari,
Associate Professor, NIRD&PR, Hyderabad,
Dr. K. Haloi, Professor, NIRD&PR -NERC, Guwahati
and Mrs. Suchitra Rasaily, Director, SIRD-Sikkim. The
delegates from the respective SIRDs highlighted the
progress on the following, during the course of their
presentation in the Conclave;
•

•

•

Performance of NIRD&PR Networking
Programmes for the last three years and the
requirement for 2016-17
Performance of NIRD&PR Research studies for
the last three years and the requirement for
2016-17
Progress of works and activities of funds
released in the last three years

•

Issues relating to Recurring Grants

•

Appointment of Core Faculty and Staff.

Action taken report on the recommendations of the
last colloquium held on 15th June 2015 regarding
the following points was presented by all SIRDs:
•

Preparation of State Training Policy on the lines
of National Training Policy prepared by
NIRD&PR, Hyderabad

•

Progress on preparation of Training Calendar
for 2016

•

Details of the visits made by the State Link
Officers of NIRD&PR to SIRD

•

Status of installation of video conferencing
facilities

•

Action taken on access to e-books and
e-journals of NIRD&PR.

105

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Field Intervention: A Visit to
Khonoma Village, Nagaland
As a part of the training programme titled
“Application of Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning
and Management of NRDWP” conducted at SIRD,
Nagaland during March 14-18, 2016, participants
were taken for a field visit to Khonoma historic
village. Khonoma village is located about 20 km from
Kohima, the State Capital of Nagaland. During GPS
field survey in the Khonoma village, it was found that
entire village had maintained a very neat and clean
environment. In case of drinking water, the village
has natural water sources i.e. springs in the hills and
from there, water is supplied using gravity forces
through pipeline.

Natural drinking water source near foot hillls of
Khonoma village

106

Collected water from the natural sources is stored
in storage tanks and from there water is distributed
to community supply tanks. Some of the community
water supply tanks are constructed under MGNREGS.
The village is having sufficient water supply, as
informed by the villagers and water supply
implementation committee. After downloading the
GPS and attribute data, it was found that the
geographical distribution of the community water
tanks are good and they cover the entire village.
Participants had a great learning experience on how
water can be conserved from natural sources and
can be distributed using indigenous techniques in
the remote hilly village like Khonoma.

Khonoma village on the left with stepped farms in
the valley. More than 20 varieties of rice are grown in
these fields surrounding the village

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

A Case Study of District
Planning Under Autonomous
District Councils (ADCS)
Autonomous District Councils (ADC) under the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution of India have been
created to preserve the customs and culture and to
safeguard the political and economic interests of the
hill tribes in the State of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram
and Tripura. The Councils have been bestowed with
legislative, judicial, executive and financial powers.
The Councils are also empowered to carry out the
district level planning on the subject accorded to
them. The case study looks into the details of the
planning process, steps, resources, various sectors
and dimensions, vertical and horizontal integration
and decentralisation of District Planning. This case
study was carried out by Dr. M. K. Shrivastava and
Dr. R. M. Pant.

Shri A. Simhachalam
Adjunct Faculty
Shri S. K Ghosh
Sr. Computer Programming Associate (Group B:
Academic)
Shri Arupjyoti Sarma
Administrative Officer (Group A: Non- academic)
Shri B.N Sarma
Accounts Officer (Group B: Non- academic)
Dr. K.K Bhattacharjee
Consultant

List of Prominent Visitors
to the Institute During 2015-16
•

Chaudhary Birender Singh, Hon’ble Union
Minister for Rural Development, Panchayati
Raj & Drinking Water & Sanitation, Govt. of
India

•

Shri Sudarshan Bhagat, Hon’ble Minister of
State for Rural Development, Govt. of India

Dr. (Prof.) R.M Pant
Director

•

Shri Rockybul Hussain, Hon’ble Minister for RD
and Panchayati Raj, Govt. of Assam

Dr. K. Haloi
Professor & Head, C-GARD

•

Shri Sarbananda Sonowal, Hon’ble Union
Minister for Youth and Sports, Govt. of India

Dr. R. Bhuyan
Assistant Professor

•

Shri S.M. Vijayanand, IAS, Secretary,
Panchayati Raj, with additional charge of
Secretary, Rural Development, in the Ministry
of Rural Development, Govt. of India & i/c
Director General, NIRD&PR

Faculty Members and Officers
of NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati
(As on 31.03.2016)

Dr. M. K Shrivastava
Assistant Professor
Dr. N.S.R Prasad
Assistant Professor

107

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

•

Professor Gautam Baruah, Mentor Director,
Indian Institute of Information Technology,
Guwahati

•

Shri P.P. Dhyani, Director, G.B Pant Institute of
Himalayan Environment and Development,
Uttarakhand

•

Dr. Arup Misra, Director, Assam Science and
Technology Environment Council.

•

Dr. B.G. Unni, Director, Research, Assam Down
Town University, Guwahati,

•

Professor Pramila Koparkar, Dean, School of
Technology, North Eastern Hill University
(NEHU)

•

Shri C.K. Das, Hon’ble Member, North Eastern
Council, Shillong

•

Prof. (Dr.) Sukumar Nandi, IIT-Guwahati

•

Shri M.R. Biswal, General Manager, PNB FGN
Office, Kolkata

•

Smt. Rashmi Shukla Sharma, Additional
Secretary, MoPR, Govt. of India

•

Smt. Sarada Muraleedharan, Joint Secretary,
MoPR, Govt. of India
S. No.

In remembrance to the great souls of India, the three
Conference Halls of the regional centre has been
renamed during 2015-16 after the name of three
great personalities of the country. The renaming had
been done as follows:

Old Name

New Name

1

Conference Hall-I

Dr. Rajendra Prasad Hall

2

Conference Hall-II

Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Hall

3

Conference Hall-III

Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam Hall

Installation of ATM
NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati is visited by a large
number of rural development functionaries, officials,
academicians, policy makers round the year in
connection with training, research, seminar,
workshop, national level policy meeting and other
administrative activities. However, visiting officials
and residential training participants face immense
difficulties towards personal banking transactions

108

Renaming of Conference Halls

due to non-availability of any banking facility in the
nearby area of the Institute. A bank ATM in the
campus of the Institute had been a long felt
requirement for the Institute. With a joint effort from
the NIRD&PR-NERC and Punjab National Bank (PNB),
an ATM with all transactional facilities was installed
newly at the premises of the Institute. The ATM was
inaugurated on 16th May 2015 by Dr. R.M Pant,
Director, NERC in the presence of Shri M.R Biswal,
General Manager, PNB FGN Office, Kolkata, Shri S.K

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Dash DGM, Circle Head, Circle Office, Guwahati and
Shri D.K. Choudhury, AGM, Zoo Road, Guwahati.

NIRD&PR-NERC. She explained the significance of the
librarians’ day and the immense contributions of Dr.
S.R Ranganathan towards the development of library
and information science in our country. Dr. Kanak
Haloi, Associate Professor who is also the Chairman
of the library committee of NERC spoke on different
aspects of the library. All the officers, faculty and staff
of the Institute attended the meeting and expressed
their views, feedback and innovative ideas for
betterment of the library. The programme was highly
appreciated by one and all and it was decided that
the same be celebrated every year.

Celebration of Women’s Day
Librarians’ Day
Librarians’ day was celebrated on August 12, 2015
to pay a tribute to the father of library and
information science Dr. S.R. Ranganathan at
NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati. A formal meeting was
called on this occasion to discuss about various issues
related to the library. The meeting was initiated by
Mrs. Pushpanjali Deka, Assistant Librarian of

The International Women’s Day (IWD) was
celebrated at NIRD&PR- NERC on March 8, 2016 at
the meeting hall in the presence of 20 functionaries
comprising faculties, officers and project staff. The
meeting was chaired by the Director of the Regional
Centre Dr. R.M. Pant. Addressing the house Dr. Pant
expressed his happiness over the initiative of the staff
to observe the international women’s day. Speaking
on the occasion Dr. Pant said that women are the
carriers of society’s values from one generation to
the next. Therefore, they should be always
respected. He said that the people in North-East India
were enjoying greater gender equality than in the
rest of India. He urged for celebrating the day every
year.

109

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

A Glimpse of Women’s Day celebration at NERC

Independence Day Celebration
The 69th Independence Day of India was celebrated
with great enthusiasm and fanfare at NIRD&PRNERC, Guwahati with a day-long programme.
National Tricolour was hoisted by Dr. R.M. Pant,
Director followed by singing of ‘National Anthem’.
Staff members with families were present during flag
hoisting ceremony. Later on a number of games and
sports under various categories like gents, ladies, and

children in three groups were organised to mark the
day in a grand manner. A painting competition for
children with patriotic theme was held on the day.
Games like music ball, bottle hitting & tumbling
generated huge interest among the competitors.
Recitation of patriotic poetry, speeches on
Dr. A.P.J Abdul Kalam and Adarsh Gram among school
going children were also held. The celebration ended
with lunch and distribution of prizes to the winners
of various competitions. Later in the evening, a
patriotic film in APJ Addul Kalam Hall for all staff and
their family members was organised.

International Yoga Day Celebration
Yoga is a physical, mental, and spiritual practice
which originated in India. Yoga remained a centuries
old tradition among Indians. Over the years yoga has
gained immense popularity among the world
communities. To brand yoga as physical and spiritual
welfare practice and to promote universal peace and
brotherhood through yoga, United Nations General
Assembly declared June 21 as ‘International Day of

110

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Yoga’. Along with the rest of the world, NIRD&PRNERC, Guwahati also celebrated first ‘International
Yoga Day’ on 21st June 2015 at the premises of the
Institute. The Yoga programme started early in the
morning. A good number of employees along with
their family members including children participated
in this programme very enthusiastically.
Dr. R.M. Pant, Director spoke on the occasion and
stressed on the need for healthy body and mind for
human beings to live happily in the society. He
requested everyone to practise yoga on a regular
basis. Shri S.K Ghosh, Sr. CPA demonstrated various
steps of Pranayam (breathing exercise) and some
free hand exercises to the congregation. Participants
also practised meditation for few minutes during the
yoga session. Shri Arupjyoti Sarma, administrative
officer and Shri Kesav Saran, JHT played active role
in celebrating this first ‘International Yoga Day’ at
NIRD&PR-NERC in a grand manner.

Gandhi Jayanti Celebration
Commemorating the 146 th birth anniversary of
Mahatma Gandhi, the father of the nation, Gandhi
Jayanti was celebrated at the campus of NIRD&PRNERC, Guwahati on 2nd October 2015 along with rest

of the world. Office staff and campus dwellers
including women and children enthusiastically
participated in the programme. The programme
started at 10.30 AM with the garlanding of the Statue
of Mahatma Gandhi by Dr. R.M Pant, Director, NERC.
Staff and their family members also paid floral tribute
to Bapu. Speaking on the occasion, Dr. R.M. Pant
elaborated the role of Mahatma Gandhi in
Independence Movement of India. He also
highlighted the relevance of the Philosophy of
Mahatma Gandhi in present society. Dr. R.M. Pant
also emphasised the importance of cleanliness and
hygienic environment which was one of the
important thoughts of Gandhiji. Since 2nd October is
also being celebrated as ‘Commemorating Day’ for
‘Swacch Bharat Mission”, a ‘Cleanliness Pledge’ was
taken by everyone present in the gathering to keep
the NIRD&PR-NERC campus neat and clean all the
time and making cleanliness an individual habit. The
programme was concluded with the singing of
national anthem followed by a light refreshment.

111

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Establishment of NRLM
Resource Cell

Progress Report of NRLM RC, NERC,
Guwahati (2015-16)

National Rural livelihood mission with its journey of
more than four years since inception has moved to
all the States of the country. With States who have
successfully incepted the mission along with the
nation are on its way to witness changes. Based on
the context of north-east, the NRLM Resource Cell
was established at NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati by the
Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) in August
2015, especially to cater to the need of the northeastern States, to help in handholding process with
certain technical support for each State requirement.
The Resource Cell works in tandem with government
organisation, State Rural Livelihood Mission, CBO, VO
and several organisations that are in line with the
Mission objectives. The main focus of the cell will be
highlighting on capacity building of each of the northeastern States on a need based requirement.

Since its inception, it has been working with the
SRLMs of the NE Region with the intent to partner
for building the capacities of their staff, community
and other stakeholders.
A two-day consultative workshop was held at
NIRD&PR in November 2015 where representatives
from the NMMU, NRLM, NRLM RC, Hyderabad as
well as from all the eight SRLMs participated.
Discussions related to progress, human resources,
CB activities and CB needs and gaps were highlighted
by the SRLMs and the role of NRLM RC was clarified.
A two-days workshop on development of training
module on SHG and Village Organisation for
Meghalaya SRLM was organised by NRLM RC NERC
in Shillong in the month of December 2015. Modules
on SHG membership, SHG concept seeding, BookKeeping and SHG management were developed and
finalised.
During the month of January 2016, the newly
recruited staff of Meghalaya SRLM were provided
with a three-day induction programme at Shillong.
During the induction training, details of NRLM
processes, verticals, different protocols of NRLM,
Bank Linkages and strategies were explained to the
newly recruited professionals. Also, a two-day
banker’s orientation programme was organised by
NRLM RC at Aizawl, Mizoram. The objective of the
programme was to sensitise the bankers on the role
of the Banks in supporting the SHGs and the VOs as
well as to provide a background about NRLM
processes and implementation strategy.

112

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Participants of Second North-east NRLM Writeshop

Exposure visit of village council representatives to
NERCORMP project sites, Meghalaya

The bankers of Nagaland were exposed for a threeday training cum exposure to the best practice sites
in Dangtol Block of Assam in the month of February
2016 in partnership with Sesta (an NGO working as
MKSP partners with Assam SRLM). The bankers had
interactions with the SHGs, Village Organisations and
local bankers. The Village Council (VC)
representatives of Nagaland visited the best practice
sites of North Eastern Region Community Resource
Management Project (NERCORMP), Meghalaya in
February 2016. The visit was organised with the
intent to understand the role of the village council
members towards better implementation of NRLM
in the State of Nagaland. The second NRLM NE
regional Writeshop was hosted by NRLM RC, NERC
in coordination with NMMU, NRLM in Feb 2016. The
Writeshop was important in the sense that the
SRLMs presented the overall background of

implementation status and progress of work done
as well as to understand the direction for planning
for FY 2016-17. Also, a two-day training on MIS was
organised at NIRD&PR-NERC in Februay, 2016.
Mr. Shantanu Kr. Bhoi and Mr. G.V.S.N. Murthy from
NMMU, NRLM and Scientist-D NIC, respectively were
the resource persons. The MIS professionals of
SRLMs from Assam, Tripura, Nagaland, Manipur and
Meghalaya participated in the training programme.
Various issues related to MIS were discussed and
addressed during the training.
In the month of March, 2016, Induction training
programme for newly recruited staff of Meghalaya,
Mizoram & Tripura took place during 10-14th March,
2016. Twenty one participants from Meghalaya,
Mizoram, and Tripura SRLM participated in the
training held at NIRD&PR-NERC.

113

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 12

ADMINISTRATION
The training, research and consultancy activities
undertaken by the Institute are supported by the
Administrative wing of the Institute. In order to
facilitate and provide a more conducive environment
for carrying out the various activities, action was
initiated to upscale and expand the existing
infrastructure facilities of the Institute. The institute
has its General Council, Executive Council and
Academic Committee to provide guidance on policy,
execution and academic matters, respectively.

General Council
The General Council is presided by the Honourable
Union Minister for Rural Development, Government
of India. General Council is responsible for
management and general control of the Institute.
The constitution of General Council for the year
2015-16 as on 31st March 2016 was as follows:

Members of the General Council
S.No.
1

Name
Shri Chaudhary Birender Singh,
Hon'ble Union Minister for Rural
Development,
Ministry of Rural Development, Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

S.No.
2

Name
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav,
Hon'ble Union Minister of State for Rural
Development,
Ministry of Rural Development, Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

(Contd...)

114

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S.No.
3

4

5

Name
Secretary,
Department of Rural Development,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.
Chief Executive,
National Co-operative Union of India 3,
Siri Institutional Area,
August Kranti Marg, (Khel Goan Marg)
New Delhi - 110 001.
Chairman,
University Grant Commission,
UGC Building,
Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi - 110 001.

6

President of Association of Indian Universities,
AIU House,
16 Comrade Indrajit Gupta Marg (Kotla Marg),
New Delhi -110 002.

7

Secretary,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation,
Room No.247, 'A' Wing,
Nirman Bhawan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

8

Additional Secretary,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Department of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

S.No.

Name

9

Joint Secretary (Training),
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

10

Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

11

Secretary,
Department of Agriculture,
Ministry of Agriculture Government of India,
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi - 110 001.

12

Secretary,
Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Department of Higher Education,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

13

Joint Secretary,
Department of Personnel and Training,
Room No.304, III Floor, Block-IV,
Old JNU Campus,
New Mehrauli Road,
New Delhi - 110 067.

14

Advisor ( Rural Development),
Planning Commission,
Room No. 232, Yojana Bhavan,
Sansad Marg,
New Delhi - 110 001.

(Contd...)

115

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S.No.

Name

Name

15

Principal Secretary,
Rural Development & Panchayati Raj
Department, Government of Assam,
Dispur, Guwahati - 781 037.

19

Secretary,
Rural Development Department,
Government of Bihar,
Main Secretariat, Patna - 800 015.

16

Principal Secretary,
Rural Development Department,
Government of Kerala,
Thiruvananthapuram - 695 001.

20

Vice-Chancellor,
Mohan Lal Sukhadia University,
Udaipur - 313 001, Rajasthan.

21

Vice-Chancellor,
Indira Gandhi National Open University
(IGNOU), Maidan Garhi,
New Delhi - 110 067.

22

Vice-Chancellor,
Bharathiar University,
Coimbatore - 641 046,
Tamil Nadu.

23

Dr. W.R. Reddy, IAS
Director General,
NIRD&PR, Rajendranagar,
Hyderabad - 500 030.

17

18

Secretary,
Panchayati Raj and Rural Development,
Government of West Bengal,
Jessop Building, 1st Floor,
63, N.S.Road, Kolkata - 700 001.
Phone No. : 033 - 22424422.
Secretary,
Rural Development & Panchayati Raj,
Government of Maharashtra,
Mantralaya,
Mumbai - 400 032.

Executive Council
The Secretary, Department of Rural Development,
Government of India is the Chairman of the Executive
Council. Management and Administration of the

116

S.No.

Institute is the responsibility of Executive Council
subject to general control exercised and directions
issued by the General Council. The constitution of
the Executive Council as on 31st March 2016 is
detailed below:

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Members of The Executive Council
S.No.

Name

S.No.

Name

1

Shri S. M. Vijayanand, IAS,
Secretary,
Department of Rural Development,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

5.

Joint Secretary (Training),
Department of Personnel and Training,
3rd Floor, Block-IV,
Old JNU Campus,
New Mehrauli Road,
New Delhi.

2

Shri S.M.Vijayanand, IAS
Secretary,
Department of Panchayati Raj,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Govt. of India
Krishi Bhavan, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Road,
New Delhi - 110 001.

6.

Shri Amarjeet Sinha, IAS,
Additional Secretary,
Department of Rural Development,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

3

Shri Vijay S. Madan, IAS
Secretary,
Department of Land Resources,
Ministry of Rural Development, Govt. of India,
12G, Nirman Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 011.

7. Smt. Seema Bahuguna, IAS,
Special Secretary & Financial Advisor,
Department of Rural Development,
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 001.

4

Shri Parameswaran Iyer,
Secretary,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation,
Room No.247, 'A' Wing, Nirman Bhavan,
New Delhi - 110 011.

8.

Academic Committee
Academic Committee under the Chairmanship of the
Director General deals with the matters relating to
research and training including finalisation of Annual

Dr. W R Reddy, IAS,
Director General,
NIRD&PR, Rajendranagar,
Hyderabad - 500 030.

Calendar for training programmes and research
programmes of the Institute. The Director General
of the Institute is the Chairman of the Academic
Committee.

117

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Members of the Academic Committee as on 31st March 2016
S.No.

Name

1

Dr. W.R. Reddy, IAS,
Director General,
NIRD&PR, Hyderabad.

Ex-officio

2

Joint Secretary (Trg.),
Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan,
New Delhi.

Ex-officio

3

Deputy Director General,
NIRD&PR, Rajendranagar,
Hyderabad - 500 030.

Ex-officio

4

Financial Advisor,
NIRD&PR,
Rajendranagar,
Hyderabad - 500 030.

Ex-officio

Restructuring of NIRD&PR
The capacity building of rural development
functionaries and elected representatives of the
Panchayati Raj Institutions in the field of rural
development is of prime importance for better
implementation of the rural development
programmes. In order to meet the growing
challenges of capacity building for rural
development, a Committee under the Chairmanship
of Dr. Y.K.Alagh was constituted by Ministry of Rural

118

Development (MoRD) to suggest measures for
reform and revamp of the National Institute of Rural
Development, State Institutes of Rural Development
(SIRDs) and Extension Training Centres (ETCs) which
are the nodal institutions engaged in training and
capacity building of the rural development
functionaries at National, State and District levels.
The Ministry had taken decisions on the
recommendations given in the reports of
Dr. Y.K. Alagh Committee and Shri S. Vijay Kumar with
the approval of Hon’ble Minister (RD, PR & DWS). In

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

order to mentor the changes, the Ministry
constituted a ‘Transition Management Committee
(TMC)’ under the chairmanship of Special Secretary
(RD). The decisions of the Alagh Committee for
implementation were
1.

Re-drafting Vision,

2.

Formation of Schools and Centres with specific
mandate,

3.

Positioning of faculty and supporting staff,

4.

Restructuring of Committees,

5.

Functioning of Transition Management
Committee (TMC),

6.

Formation of Facilitation Committee and
Dispute Resolution Sub-committee,

7.

Closure of Regional Centres at Jaipur and
Patna,

S. No.
1.

8.

Video conferencing facilities to SIRDs,

9.

Developing networking with Institutions of
excellence in rural development and rural
technology,

10.

Preparation of Plan of Action for improving the
quality of training and research programmes,

11.

Amendment of Rules & Bye-laws of NIRD&PR.

Out of the above, decisions pertaining to Serial
Numbers 1 to 8 have been implemented and the
others are initiated and in process. As per the
decision of the Alagh Committee, the Institute has
been restructured into Schools having centres within
each school with allocation of faculty based on their
options, qualifications and seniority, as given below.

Proposed School

Proposed Centres within the School

Development Studies & Social Justice

Centre for Human Resource Development (CHRD)
Centre for Gender and Development (CGAD)
Centre for Equity & Social Development (CESD)
Centre for Agrarian Studies (CAS)
Centre for PG Studies and Distance Education
(CPGS&DE)

(Contd...)

119

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.
2.

Proposed School

Proposed Centres within the School

Rural Livelihoods and Infrastructure

Centre for Wage Employment (CWE)
Centre for Skills and Jobs (CSJ)
Centre for Financial Inclusion and Entrepreneurship
(CFIE)
Centre for Rural Infrastructure (CRI)
Centre for Entrepreneurship Development (CED)
Centre for Livelihoods (CFL)

3.

Sustainable Development

Centre for Natural Resource Management (CNRM)
Centre for Climate Change & Disaster Mitigation
(CCCDM)

4.

Public Policy and Good Governance

Centre for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation
(CPME)
Centre for CSR, Public Private Partnership and
People’s Action (CC, PPP & PA)
Centre for Good Governance & Policy Analysis
(CGG&PA)

5.

Local Governance

Centre for Panchayati Raj (CPR)
Centre for Decentralised Planning (CDP)
Centre for Social Service Delivery (CSSD)
Centre for Social Audit (CSA)

6.

Science, Technology and

Centre for Geo-informatics Applications in Rural

Knowledge Systems

Development (CGARD)
Centre for Innovations and Appropriate Technologies
(CIAT)
Professional Support Centres
Centre for Development Documentation &
Communication (CDC)
Centre for Information & Communication Technology
(CICT)
Centre for Research & Training Coordination and
Networking (CRTCN)

120

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

NIRD&PR FACULTY AND OFFICERS AS ON 31-3-2016
Dr. W.R. Reddy, IAS., Director General
Ms. Chanda Pandit, IA&AS, FA and Registrar & Director (Admn.)i/c

School of Development Studies &
Social Justice

( CPGS & DE )
Centre for Post Graduate Studies &
Distance Education

( CAS )
Centre for Agrarian Studies

Dr. C.S. Singhal, Professor & Head i/c
Dr. A. Debapriya, Associate Professor
Dr. (Ms.) Sonal Mobar Roy, Assistant Professor

Dr. K. Suman Chandra, Professor & Head
Dr. (Ms.) Ch. Radhika Rani, Associate Professor

School of Rural Livelihoods
(CESD)
Centre for Equity and Social
Development
Dr. R.R. Prasad, Head i/c
Dr. (Ms.) G. Valentina, Associate Professor

(CGSD)
Centre for Gender Studies and
Development
Dr. C.S. Singhal, Professor & Head
Dr. (Ms.) N.V. Madhuri, Associate Professor
Dr. (Ms.) Sucharita Pujari, Assistant Professor

(CHRD)
Centre for Human Resource
Development

(CWE)
Centre for Wage Employment
Dr. G. Rajanikanth,
Associate Professor & Head i/c
Dr. (Ms.) P. Anuradha, Assistant Professor

(CSJ)
Centre for Skills and Jobs
Shri M Ravi Babu,
Executive Director (Additional charge )

(CFIE )
Centre for Financial Inclusion &
Entrepreneurship
Dr. B.K. Swain, Professor & Head

Dr. (Ms.) Gyanmudra, Professor & Head
Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar Associate Professor
Dr. Lakhan Singh, Assistant Professor

121

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

( CRI )
Centre for Rural Infrastructure
Dr. P. SivaRam, Professor & Head
Dr. R. Ramesh, Assistant Professor
Dr. S. Nagabhushan Rao,
Assistant Professor (on deputation)

(CFL)
Centre for Livelihoods
Dr. P. SivaRam, Professor & Head i/c
Dr. U. Hemanth Kumar, Associate Professor
Dr. G.V. Krishna Lohi Das, Assistant Professor
Dr. P. Raj Kumar, Assistant Professor

School of Sustainable Development
(CNRM)
Centre for Natural Resource
Management
Dr. K. Suman Chandra, Professor & Head i/c
Dr. S. Siddayya, Associate Professor

(CCC&DM)
Centre for Climate Change and
Disaster Management
Dr. E.V. Prakash Rao, Professor & Head
Dr. V. Suresh Babu, Associate Professor

122

School of Public Policy and Good
Governance
(CPME )
Centre for Planning, Monitoring and
Evaluation
Dr. S.Chatterjee, Professor & Head
Dr. G. Venkata Raju, Associate Professor
Dr. (Ms.) Aruna Jaya Mani, Assistant Professor

(CC, PPA & PA )
Centre for CSR, Public Private
Partnership & People’s Action
Dr. R. Murugesan, Professor & Head

(CGG&PA)
Centre for Good Governance &
Policy Analysis
Dr. (Ms.) M. Sarumathy,
Associate Professor & Head i/c
Dr. K. Prabhakar, Assistant Professor

School of Local Governance
(CPR)
Centre for Panchayati Raj
Dr. (Ms.) K. Jayalakshmi, Professor & Head
Dr. K. Ajit Kumar, Associate Professor
Dr. (Ms.)Pratyusna Patnaik, Assistant Professor

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

(CDP)
Centre for Decentralised Planning
Dr. Y. Bhaskara Rao,Professor & Head
Dr. R. Chinnadurai, Associate Professor

(CSA)
Centre for Social Audit
Dr. (Ms.) C. Dheeraja,
Associate Professor

School of Science, Technology and
Knowledge System
( C-GARD )
Centre for Geo-Informatics
Applications in Rural Development
Dr. V. Madhava Rao, Advisor & Head i/c
Dr. P. Keshava Rao, Associate Professor
Shri D S R Murthy, Assistant Professor
Dr. T. Phanindra Kumar, Assistant Professor
Shri H.K. Solanki, Assistant Professor
Shri K. Rajeshwar,
Computer Programming Associate

(CIAT)
Centre for Innovations &
Appropriate Technologies
Dr. Y. Gangi Reddy,
Professor & Head

Professional Support Centres
(CDC)
Centre for Development
Documentation & Communication
Dr. (Ms.) Gyanmudra, Professor & Head i/c
Dr. (Ms.) K. Papamma, Editor
Dr. (Ms.) Vasanthi Rajendran, Assistant Director
(On deputation to CIRDAP as Director, ICD)
Dr. (Ms.) T. Rama Devi, Documentation Officer
Dr. (Ms.) Padmaja, Senior Librarian.

(CICT)
Centre for Information &
Communication Technology
Dr. P. Satish Chandra, Professor & Head
Shri G.V. Satyanarayana, Assistant Professor

(CRTCN)
Centre for Research and Training
Coordination & Networking
Dr. (Ms.) Gyanmudra,
Professor & Head, Research i/c
Dr. P. Durgaprasad, Head i/c (Training)
Dr. R.P.Achari, Associate Professor (Training)

Project Directors
Dr. M. Ravi Babu,
IRTS, Executive Director, DDU-GKY
Shri K.P. Rao, Project Director, NRLM Cell
Shri O.N. Bansal, Project Director, RSETI

123

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Administration

Maintenance Unit

Dr. A. Debapriya, Assistant Registrar (E) i/c
Shri N.M. Naik, Assistant Registrar (T) i/c
Shri C.Ramaswamy, Section Officer (C)
Ms. P. Dhanalakshmi, Section Officer( D )
Shri K.C. Behera, Public Relations officer
Shri Asrarul Haque, Hostel Manager

Shri P.V. Dayanand, Executive Engineer
Shri B.V. Hiremath, Horticulture Officer

NIRD&PR-NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL
CENTRE, GUWAHATI, ASSAM
Dr. R.M. Pant, Director
Dr. K. Haloi, Associate Professor
Dr. (Ms.) Ratna Bhuyan,
Assistant Professor
Dr. N.S.R. Prasad, Assistant Professor
Dr. Mukesh Kumar Srivastava,
Assistant Professor
Shri A. Simhachalam, Adjunct Faculty
Shri Arup Jyothi Sarma,
Administrative Officer
Shri B.N. Sarma, Accounts Officer

Accounts
Ms. Chanda Pandit,
IA&AS, Advisor (FM)& FA i/c
Shri P. Janardhana Rao AFA & PAO i/c
Shri G.V. Sridhar Goud, Accounts Officer
Ms. K.R. Ashalata, Accounts Officer

Health Centre
Dr. (Ms.) Sarah Mathews, Lady Medical Officer

Hindi Section
Ms. Anita Pandey, Assistant Director (OL)
Shri E. Ramesh, Senior Hindi Translator

Staff: Category-wise details of the staff (including NIRD&PR-NERC, Guwahati)
Academic Staff
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Category

SC

ST

Others

Total

Ex-Servicemen

Women out of Col.5

Group – A

7

2

32

41

--

13

Group – B

--

--

8

8

--

--

Total

7

2

40

49

--

13

124

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Non-Academic Staff
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Category

SC

ST

Others

Total

Ex-Servicemen

Women out of Col.5

Group – A

1

--

4

5

--

3

Group – B

8

1

22

31

--

11

Group – C

16

4

97

117

4

26

Group – C
(Re-classified)

43

7

43

93

1

14

Total

68

12

166

246

5

54

General Administration
Director General, as Principal Executive Officer of the
Institute is responsible for administration of the
Institute and exercises powers under the direction
and guidance of the Executive Council.
Administration of the Institute is responsible for
coordination, conduct of statutory meetings,
establishment and personnel management,

Meeting

Date

management of guest houses, campus support
services, health services and welfare of the
employees.

Statutory Meetings
The following are the Statutory Meetings held during
the year 2015-16:

Venue

116th Executive Council

27.11.2015

At Ministry of RD, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi

117th Executive Council

01.02.2016

At Ministry of RD, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi

Infrastructure Facilities
The Institute is situated in an area of 174.21 acres
with infrastructural facilities like faculty buildings,
administrative buildings, well equipped library, three

A/C guest houses with 152 guest rooms, Eleven
Conference Halls with modern audio-visual aids,
Auditorium with seating capacity of 300 persons,
Community Hall, Health Centre, Sports Complex, 219
residential quarters, Staff Canteen, Crèche, Mahila
Mandali, Youth Club, Yoga and Gymnasium facilities,

125

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

etc. Action has also been initiated to construct a
new conference hall with state of the art facility.

IT Infrastructure
NIRD&PR has an excellent state-of-the-art Computer
Centre with latest technological facilities for
dedicated connectivity of internet and intranet and
recognised as a Centre of Excellence by the
Department of Personnel and Training.
The NIRD&PR network provides online services for
the effective academic, administration functions, eoffice, e-journals, NIRD&PR e-JRD, IPKN and has links
to vast resource links of top ministries and
departments, State and districts and SIRDs/ETC ,
Institutes, Research Organisations, etc., with 1000odd hosts in its network range.
NIRD&PR gets uninterrupted internet services
through its National Knowledge Network
connectivity of 100 mbps and with a redundancy of
22 mbps dedicated link availed of from M/s Railtel
Corporation of India. NIRD&PR's network is
technology-intensive providing mail.gov.in domain
by NIC, e-office, and caters to all the services to the
International and National Participants in campus.
Wi-Fi facilities are available across office Buildings
and Guest Houses. There are two well- equipped

S.No.

Funded For

Computer Labs for Training, evaluation, hand
holding, etc, for the International and National
participants, field functionaries, Ministry Officials,
students, etc. These labs meet the current
requirements of the office, catering to training and
research activities of the Institute and are at par with
industry and meet the emerging needs of the
Institute.

Staff Welfare
The Institute continued its support and assistance,
as in the past, to Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan Vidhyasram
School located in its campus. During the year under
review, a large number of children of NIRD&PR
employees availed of the benefits. The Institute has
been providing required support to school for
extension and betterment of infrastructure.
The Institute continued to encourage voluntary effort
in welfare activities by sanctioning grants from the
benevolent fund of the Institute. Grants were
provided for running NIRD&PR crèche in the campus
for the benefit of the staff members of the Institute
and also for activities by the Sports and Recreation
Club, etc. The details of grants sanctioned are as
follows:

Amount (`)

1.

NIRD&PR Sports & Recreation Club

70,000

2.

NIRD&PR Creche

2,26,149

3.

NIRD&PR Canteen

1,20,000
(Contd...)

126

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S.No.

Funded For

Amount (`)

4.

NIRD&PR Mahila Mandali

0

5.

NIRD&PR BVBV School

6.

Karate Coach for participants / campus children

43,400

7.

Assistance to distressed families of deceased staff

50,000

31,34,717

Total
Group C & D employees were given several other
benefits like refundable loans for marriage of
children, refundable loans for higher studies of
children, etc., at very low interest rates from the
Benevolent Fund of the Institute. The NIRD&PR
canteen management was entrusted to a self-help
group.

Progressive Use of Hindi2015-2016

36,44,266

Organisation of Hindi Fortnight / Hindi Day
Hindi fortnight was celebrated from 14 September
to 28 September, 2015 and Hindi Day celebration was
organised in the Institute. Dr. Harveer Singh Nehwal,
Scientist & Head, Directorate of OilSeeds Research
& Dr.M.Ravi Babu, IRTS, Executive Director, DDU-GKY,
NIRD&PR presided over the function. Prizes were
given to all the winners of Hindi Competition on the
occasion of Hindi Day.

Performance of the Institute in the field of Official
Language implementation was worth mentioning. As
per directions of Department of Official Language,
Government of India, the Institute has been
implementing the Official Language policy of the
Government from time to time. Following are the
achievements of the Institute in implementation of
Official Language during the year.

Learn a Hindi Word Every Day Scheme
“Learn a Hindi word every day scheme” is being
implemented in the Institute to enhance the working
knowledge of Hindi Officers/ employees of the
Institute. Simultaneously, Hindi quotations were also
displayed to create interest towards Hindi among
officers and employees of the Institute.

During the fortnight, six Hindi Competitions were
organised as follows:
1.

Sulekh Competition (for Group ‘C’ Employees
(MTS)

2.

Hindi Essay Writing Competition

3.

Hindi Essay Writing Competition (For PG
Diploma Students)

127

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

4.

Hindi Essay Quiz Competition

5.

Hindi Essay Antakshari Competition

Campus and prizes were given away by Principal,
BVBV School. The above competitions were
conducted for Hindi and non-Hindi students.

6.

Hindi Essay Antakshari Competition (For PG
Diploma Students)

Organisation of Hindi Workshop

7.

Hindi Daily Words Competition

8.

Memory Competition

In addition to this, essay, poem recitation and
elocution competitions were conducted in Bharatiya
Vidya Bhavan Vidyashram located in the NIRD&PR

As per the direction of the Annual Action Plan of the
year 2014-15, the Institute conducted Hindi
Workshop for ‘A’ category staff and officers of
NIRD&PR. They were trained on the use of “Unicode”
Software on 10 March, 2016.

Hindi Publications of the Institute

5.

NIRD Training Calendar- 2015-16

During the above period, the following publications
were brought out which are as follows:

6.

RSETI Samachar Patra-4 Numbers (Bilingual)

7.

NIRD&PR Profile (Hindi)

1.

NIRD&PR Samachar Patra (12 Numbers)

2.

Annual Report – 2014-15

Notification in Official Gazette of Govt. of
India

3.

Annual Accounts – 2014-15

4.

Grameen Vikas Sameeksha (Bi-Annual Journal)
(1) January-June-2015 (2) July-December2015

128

Eighty per cent of the staff members have achieved
working knowledge of Hindi. By virtue of this,
NIRD&PR is notified in the Gazette of India under
10(4) of Official Language Rules, 1976.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Bi-lingual facility is provided in all the
Computers

Rural Development, New Delhi and Regional
Implementation Office, Bengaluru.

All the 491 computers of the Institute were made
Bi-Lingual. Unicode and APS Software were installed.

Duly filled Annual Evaluation Report for the
Year 2015-16

Compliance of Section 3(3) of Official
Language Act

Reports were sent to the Ministry of Rural
Development, New Delhi and Rajbhasha Vibhag,
New Delhi on 06-04-2015.

All name plates, sign boards and indication plates of
faculty, Official Language Section, etc., and name of
the Institute are in Bi-Lingual (Hindi + English). All
official documents and reports under the Section 3(3)
of Official Language Act were issued in Bi-Lingual.
Nearly 1400 pages were translated during the review
year.

Quarterly Progress Report
Duly filled Quarterly Progress Reports for the
quarters ending 30-06-2015, 30-09-2015, 31-122015 and 31-03-2016 have been sent to Ministry of

Faculty Development
As a part of faculty development and enrichment
process, faculty and non-faculty members of the
Institute are deputed on a regular basis to various
seminars, conferences, workshops and training
programmes in India and abroad. The details of
faculty and non-faculty participation in the various
programmes during 2015-16 are given below:

International (Academic)
S. No.

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/Conference/Training
Programme

1.

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar, Associate Professor, CHRD

Participated and presented papers at 4th
International Conference on Research in
Humanities, Sociology and Corporate Social
Responsibility (RHSCSR) at Penang, Malaysia
during September 25-26, 2015

2

Dr. N V Madhuri, Associate Professor, CGSD

Participated in a“Regional Workshop on
Sufficiency Economy Philosophy and the
New Theory” Bangkok and Petchaburi
Province, Thailand; during May 25th – 29th,
2015

129

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

National (Academic)
S. No.

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/Conference/Training
Programme

1

Dr. B K Swain, Professor & Head (CFIE)

Attended the Post Examination Training for
Certified Credit Officers Course conducted by
Indian Institute of Banking and Finance,
Mumbai held at Ahmedabad during March
14 – 18, 2016

2

Dr. R. Murugesan, Professor & Head,
CSR, PPP&PA

Attended the Two-day Conference on
Corporate Social Responsibility at Institute
of Public Enterprises, Hyderabad during
March 4 – 5, 2016

3

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar, Associate Professor, CHRD

Attended the Training Programme on
Management of Training (MoT) Course at
Institute of Secretariat Training &
Management (ISTM), New Delhi during
March 14 – 18, 2016

4

Dr. Ch. Radhika Rani, Associate Professor, CAS

1.

Participated and presented a paper at
34th Annual Conference of Indian
Association of Research in National
Income and Wealth (IARNIW) at Indira
Gandhi Institute of Development
Research, Mumbai during November
20-21,2015

2.

Attended the Training Programme
at IRMA, Anand during Nov. 30 December 9, 2015

5

Dr. Lakhan Singh, Associate Professor, CHRD

Participated and presented a paper at
Annual Conference of IASSH on Health and
Development: Research Practice and Policy
at University of Kerala during December
10-12, 2015
(Contd...)

130

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/Conference/Training
Programme

6

Dr. S. Siddayya, Associate Professor, CNRM

Participated and presented a paper at 23rd
Agricultural Conference on Inter and IntraSectoral Dynamics for Transforming Indian
Agriculture at Central Institute of Fisheries
Education, Mumbai during 2-4, December,
2015

7

Dr. G. Valentina, Associate Professor, CESD

Participated in 7th Edition of World DIDAC
India, 2015 at Bengaluru during September
9 – 11, 2015

8.

Dr. A. Debapriya, Associate Professor, CPGS

Participated and Presented a Paper in 10th
International Cooperative Alliance – Asia and
Pacific Regional Research on Governance of
Co-operatives: Issues and Challenges at
VAMNICOM, Pune during November 5-6,
2015

9

Dr. C. Dheeraja, Associate
Professor & Head, CSA

Attended the Training Programme on Impact
Evaluation at IRMA, Anand during March
1- 5, 2016

10

Dr. R. Ramesh, Assistant Professor, CRI

Attended the Course on “Impact Evaluation
Winter School 2015”, 30th November – 9th
December,2015 at IRMA, Anand

11.

Dr. Sucharita Pujari, Assistant Professor, CGSD

Participated and Presented a Paper at the
13th Annual Conference of Indian
Association for Social Sciences and Health on
“Health and Development: Reasons Practice
and Policy’ at the University of Kerala,
Thiruvananathapuram, during December 10
– 12, 2015

12

Dr. G V K Lohi Das, Assistant Professor, CFL

Attended the Training Programme on Impact
Evaluation at IRMA, Anand during March
1- 5, 2016

131

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

National (Academic)
S. No.

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/Conference/Training
Programme

1

Dr. (Ms.) Sarah Mathew, Lady Medical Officer

Attended the 12th Healthcare Executives
Management Development Programme
(HxMDP) organised by All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi during
October 4 – 10, 2015 at Ramoji Film City,
Hyderabad

2.

Dr. M. Padmaja, Senior Librarian

1.

Participated in International
Con ference on “In formation
Unbounded: Past, Present and Future
of Information Science” at University
of Mysuru, during June 18-20, 2015

2.

Attended the National Conference on
“Bridging the Digital Divide: Open
Source and Open Access Movement at
University of Mysuru, Mysuru during
March 11 – 12, 2016

3.

Smt. Anita Pandey, Assistant Director (OL)

Attended the 8th Hindi Conference &
Training Programme at Hotel Shreehari/
Prabhupada, New Marine Drive, Puri
(Odisha) organised by Rajabhasha Academy,
New Delhi during February 9 – 11, 2016

4.

Shri E. Ramesh, Senior Hindi Translator, OL

1.

Attended the One-Day Hindi National
Workshop on Hindi at MANAGE, on
9-12-2015 Rajendranagar, Hyderabad

(Contd...)

132

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Name of the Faculty and Designation

Name of the Seminar/Conference/Training
Programme
2.

5.

Shri S.I. Hussain, Stenographer,
Gr.II (Hindi), OL

Activities/Initiatives During
the Year 2015-16

Attended the 11th All India Joint Official
Language Scientific and Technical Seminar at
Advanced System for Laboratory (ASL),
Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad during February
25 – 26, 2016

international programmes. In addition, the following
programmes were initiated:
•

Faculty Development Programme on
‘Research Methodology’ in collaboration with
J-Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) team

•

In addition to the reading material provided
to the participants, continuous efforts are
made to bring field realities in terms of
documentation of best practices and success
stories into the classroom discussions. It is in
this context, development of case studies
becomes significant. Accordingly, case studies
are planned as part of research activities of the
Institute with a view to strengthening the
capacities of faculty of the Institute on this
category of research. Accordingly, a faculty
development programme "Workshop on
development of case studies in rural

The Institute has taken up the following initiatives
during the year 2015-16:

Partnerships with
•

UNICEF – For Capacity building initiatives on
critical importance of nutrition for survival,
growth and development

•

ISRO – For GIS based district planning in five
identified districts on pilot basis and Space
Applications in Rural Development

•

UNDP – For capacity building related to
MGNREGA, Nutrition and Education

As part of Faculty Development Scheme (FDS), the
faculty members have participated in national and

Attended the 11th All India Joint
Official Language Scientific and
Technical Seminar at Advanced System
for Laboratory (ASL), Kanchanbagh,
Hyderabad during February 25 – 26,
2016

133

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

development" was conducted during first
week of October, 2015 in collaboration with
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, with an
objective to not only refresh the faculty on the
nuances of case development but more
importantly to share and consolidate their
experiences in this mode of research.

Career Advancement Scheme (CAS) of
Faculty : The CAS was extended to the faculty

E-Office: E-Office is a process for ensuring

Modified Assured Career Progression
Scheme (MACPS) for non-academic staff of
the Institute

transparency, efficiency, effectiveness, consistency,
quality of administration, accountability and
optimum use of resources in the government
processes and service delivery mechanisms. During
the year, NIRD&PR initiated the implementation of
the e-Office and entrusted the work to the NICSI.
About 200 Desktop Systems with robust and latest
configuration were procured for operationalising the
e-Office system in NIRD&PR successfully.

Biometric Attendance: To ensure participation
of all employees and enabling their optimum
performance, the Aadhar based Biometric
Attendance system was introduced for the
employees of NIRD&PR.

Technical Committee: The Executive Council of
the Institute in the year 2008 authorised for
constitution of Technical Committee to approve all
the technical estimates that are beyond the powers
of the Executive Engineer and accordingly, Technical
Committee was constituted. The Committee
was reconstituted under the chairmanship of
Shri R. Kondala Rao, Retd. ENC PR and presently
Advisor to Government of Andhra Pradesh, to take
up the pending works already approved by EC earlier
as well as offer suggestions for the creation,
maintenance and utilisation of new infrastructure
facilities in NIRD&PR.

134

members whose cases were eligible for grant of next
higher scale/ grade of Assistant Professor (Sr.Scale),
Associate Professor and Professor, following due
procedure. A total of 31 faculty members were given
CAS as per NIRD&PR CAS guidelines.

During the year, 63 non-academic staff (Group B, C
including Re-classified Group C staff) of the Institute
who were eligible were given MACPS as per
Government of India guidelines.

Inclusion of soft skills motivational
modules in every ongoing programme –
details about IoFC programme
As part of the Faculty Development Programme of
NIRD&PR, an Iterative Training Workshop was
conducted by the 'Initiatives of Change (IofC)’,
Panchgani, Maharashtra on 28th March for the
faculty Members, Project Directors, Advisers and
Consultants of NIRD&PR. The participants were
asked to voice their major concerns of rural
development and strategise their priorities of
interventions vis-a-vis the mandate and strengths of
NIRD&PR. The programme was received very well
by all the participants. As an outcome of this
programme, the Institute proposed to take forward
the FDP by developing an yearly plan of action of
engagement for the benefit of the officials and staff
of NIRD&PR. Additionally, internal FDPs for NIRD&PR
as well as SIRDs was drawn.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Initiatives towards energy and water
conservation and solid waste management
in NIRD&PR
a)

5.

Setting up of rooftop solar systems

6.

Awareness creation among various
stakeholders

7.

Recycling of waste water for lawns/
plants, improving the fixtures, installing
sprinkler/drip system

8.

Planning for awareness creation among
various stakeholders

Energy and water conservation:
With a view to ensuring optimisation of energy
and conservation of water, an energy audit and
water conservation study was got done by the
National Productivity Council, Hyderabad.
Some of the major recommendations which
were approved and are under implementation
included
1.

Energy savings by proper loading/
shifting of loads on transformers

2.

Monetary saving by improvement of
Power factor

3.

Installation of solar water heaters for all
the hostel blocks

4.

Energy saving by energy efficient fixtures
and equipment such as LED bulbs, star
rated fans, setting up of voltage
controllers, etc.

b)

Solid waste management:
A review of the existing solid waste
management practice in NIRD&PR was
conducted with an objective of achieving
“Clean & Green NIRD&PR campus” by
engaging the services of SRACO, an NGO
working on Solid Waste Management,
Hyderabad. Based on the findings, plans for
scientific management of waste generated and
creation of awareness among all the campus
residents were drawn up.

135

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Celebration of International
Women's Day
National Institute of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj celebrated International Women’s
Day on March 8, 2016. The Centre for Gender Studies
and Development (CGSD), NIRD&PR Hyderabad, had
invited and honoured several women who
contributed a lot as community resource persons and
brought changes in the lives of women by
mobilisation through self-help groups. They shared
their experiences on this occasion, which was very
inspiring.
Mrs Anita Ramchandran, IAS, Commissioner,
Telangana State Institute of Panchayati Raj & Rural
Development, Government of Telangana, was the
chief guest and Ms.Sowmya Kidambi, Director,
Society for Social Audit, Accountability and
Transparency, Department of Rural Development,
Government of Telangana was the Special Invitee.
The Community Resource Persons invited on the
occasion were Smt. Mamta Dewangan, Community
Resource Person from Chhattisgarh, Smt. Nurjaha,
Community Resource Person from Bihar; Smt.
Baijanti Devi, Community Resource Person from
Bihar; Smt. Zubeida, Differently Abled Rural
Entrepreneur, Smt. Chennamma, Solar Bare Foot
Engineer, NIRD&PR and Ms. Naina Jaiswal,
International Table Tennis Player.
Ms. Anita Ramchandran, Chief Guest of this occasion
addressed the gathering. She emphasised on
continuous and concerted efforts towards achieving
a gender just society. She reiterated the need for
women emancipation at social, economic and
political levels in the society. She was of the view
that everyone must work towards women’s rights in

136

a patriarchal society. The women have special
responsibility and can change the society for faster
development. She cited the example of the CRP’s
who have been doing a commendable job on women
issues at the community level.

Ms Anita Ramchandran, Chief Guest

Ms.Sowmya Kidambi, in her address said real
empowerment is possible only when we put an effort
to change our mindset and work together towards a
gender just society. She also highlighted the
importance of creating conditions for elimination of
discrimination against women and for their full and
equal participation in social development.

Ms. Sowmya Kidambi, Special Invitee

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Dr. C.S. Singhal, Prof & Head, CGSD while welcoming
the guests in his remarks stated about the 2016
theme for International Women’s Day i.e. “Planet 5050 by 2030: Step It Up for Gender Equality”. He
pleaded for achievement of sustainable
development goal of Gender Equality and
Empowerment of Women and Girls by 2030.

Implementation of Right to
Information (RTI) Act, 2005
Keeping in view the spirit of transparency and
statutory obligations, the Institute has taken steps
to implement the provisions of Right to information
Act, 2005 for proving information to citizens of the
country in compliance with the same. NIRD&PR

website provides details of mandatory disclosures
as provided under RTI Act, 2005. The Institute has
designated Appellate Authority, Public Information
Officer, two Assistant Public Information Officers and
Transparency Officer for providing information
sought by the RTI applicants and their names are also
displayed in the NIRD&PR website. The Institute also
has separate Appellate Authority and Public
Information Officer for its North-Eastern Regional
Centre (NERC) at Guwahati. During the year 201516, 70 RTI applications and appeals on various issues
as indicated below were received from citizens and
were disposed of as per procedures and information
available and held in NIRD&PR records was made
available to the RTI applicants. The Institute also
submitted mandatory online quarterly returns, as
per procedure.

RTI Application / Appeals-Categorisation

137

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CHAPTER 13

FINANCE AND ACCOUNTS
NIRD&PR is a Central autonomous body funded by
Ministry of Rural Development for all its activities.
Every year, as per the approved budget, the Ministry
releases grants under Plan/Non-Plan Heads. Grants
are also released for specific capital expenditure,
based on the proposals from NIRD&PR and as per
requirement. The Finance and Accounts Division of
the Institute is entrusted with the functions of
Budgeting, Pay & Accounting of funds, Preparation
of Annual Accounts, etc. Institute is following the
double-entry system with financial year beginning
from 1st of April and ending with 31st of March every
year. The Annual Accounts of the Institute are
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India (CAG). The Accounts of the Institute is prepared
duly adhering to the prescribed norms approved by
the CAG for Central Autonomous Bodies. The Audit
Report of CAG on the Accounts of the Institute is
incorporated in the Annual Accounts every year and
submitted to the Parliament.

138

Grants released under Plan and Non-Plan heads are
utilised to meet the expenditure on core activities
of the Institute like capacity building, research,
development, seminars & conferences, Rural
Technology Park, Publications, subscription to
journals, library, maintenance and other recurring
& non-recurring expenditure. In addition to the
above, NIRD&PR also receives funds from various
Programme Divisions of MoRD to spearhead the
various flagship programmes of the Government of
India in rural sector like Deen Dayal Upadhyaya
Grameen Kaushal Yojana (DDUGKY), Saansad Adarsh
Gram Yojana (SAGY), Rurban Mission, Indira Awaas
Yojana (IAY), MGNREGA, capacity building under
Social Audit, NRLM, RSETI, etc. Funds are also
received from various other Ministries, State
Governments, International bodies of United
Nations, etc., for research, impact assessment,
capacity building which are specific to the
requirement of the funding agencies.

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

For the financial year 2015-16, the expenditure of
the Institute is ` 67.64 crore against the Grants
released to the tune of ` 57.23 crore. An amount of
` 10.41 crore was met from the internally generated
resources. Following is the graphically presentation
with regard to the grants and expenditure incurred
for the past three years.

(` in Crores)
Year

Total Grants

Expenditure

2013-14

59.18

58.21

2014-15

52.04

57.79

2015-16

57.23

67.64

Grants ` (In crore)

Chart of Grants and Expenditure for
2013-14 to 2015-16

As laid down in the GFRs No. 208(iv) and with the
approval of Executive Council, the Institute
established a Corpus Fund in 2008-09. The main
objective of the Corpus Fund is to achieve long- term

financial stability of the Institute and to meet
expenditure on specific developmental projects/
studies/programmes. As on 31 March 2016, the
Corpus Fund stood at ` 150.63 crore.

139

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Besides, Institute also established the Development
Fund, Benevolent Fund, Provident Fund, Building
Fund & Medical Corpus Fund which are object
oriented with specific purpose. The brief details of
the funds are given below:

Building Fund was formed in 1989-90 mainly for
undertaking the infrastructural development of the
Institute from funds earmarked for the same. The
balance of the Fund as on 31 March 2016 was ` 23.71
crore.

Development Fund was established in the early
Eighties to provide financial assistance to meritorious
NIRD&PR staff/officers for higher education, finance
specific developmental projects of the Institute, etc.
Benevolent Fund was also established in the same
period for providing staff welfare measures like
children’s education loans & marriage loans for
Group C staff, one-time financial assistance to
families of deceased staff, etc. The main source of
the above two funds is a fixed portion of net savings/
income of the Institute from consultancy projects
and interest earned on the Fund. The balance of the
Funds as on 31 March 2016 was ` 7.00 crore &
` 4.26 crore respectively.

Provident Fund was established for all PF related
transactions of the staff of the Institute. The balance
of the Fund as on 31 March 2016 was ` 16.57 crore.

140

Medical Corpus Fund was established to provide
medical benefits to retired employees and their
families. The sources of this fund are subscriptions
from staff/retired staff and interest earned on the
fund. The balance of the fund as on 31 March 2016
was ` 0.66 crore.

Category-wise Distribution of Participants Attended NIRD&PR Programmes During the Year 2014-15
Month

1

Govt.
Officials

Financial ZPCs & PRIs NGOs/SHGs Natl/ State
Institutions
Instts for
Res.& Trg

Univ/
Colleges

International

Other
Stakeholders

Total

Women No. of Prg.
Conducted

No. of Trg. No. of Trg.
Days
Person Days

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

April

814

38

49

133

21

4

12

2

1073

53

34

170

182410

May

478

18

29

52

11

10

0

22

620

57

19

95

58900

June

553

71

2

27

1

4

0

3

661

94

22

110

72710

July

485

101

29

5

7

0

34

9

670

91

17

85

56950

August

648

165

59

66

3

21

9

8

979

172

30

150

146850

September

449

23

86

108

1

13

32

1

713

87

23

115

81995

October

301

87

28

18

0

5

61

0

500

110

18

90

45000

November

649

57

12

71

3

1

46

0

839

50

24

120

100680

December

150

19

205

39

0

0

0

3

416

111

11

55

22880

January

312

70

1

9

4

26

37

0

459

57

18

90

41310

February

447

33

4

49

4

4

63

0

604

73

20

100

60400

March

105

1

94

13

9

21

14

0

257

37

7

35

8995

Total

5391

683

598

590

64

109

308

48

7791

992

243

1215

879080

Networking

8000

4000

12000

3600

400

2000

24000000

3690

3690

1825

101

505

1863450

1711

342

59

295

504745

4934

986

194

970

4785980

a) Hyderabad

NRLM
IAY

1711

MGNREGA

4378

556

DDU-GKY

3165

3165

633

107

535

1693275

RTP

3240

3240

315

159

795

2575800

6453

36531

8693

1263

6315

36302330

Total

19480

683

598

1146

7754

109

308

141

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - I

142

ANNEXURE - I (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

April

90

0

2

0

0

0

0

57

149

48

6

30

4470

May

137

0

0

4

1

9

0

29

180

68

5

25

4500

June

149

0

1

0

3

0

0

55

208

77

6

30

6240

July

112

0

16

3

0

10

0

0

141

35

4

20

2820

August

143

0

0

2

6

0

0

27

178

55

7

35

6230

September

77

0

0

0

11

0

0

0

88

16

3

15

1320

October

116

0

0

0

2

10

0

0

128

38

4

20

2560

November

115

0

0

6

3

0

0

22

146

36

6

30

4380

December

15

0

13

0

63

16

0

28

135

56

4

20

2700

January

51

0

10

9

9

88

0

17

184

52

6

30

5520

February

67

3

5

2

6

96

0

32

211

67

6

30

6330

March

66

0

0

3

18

57

0

1

145

45

6

30

4350

Total

1138

3

47

29

122

286

0

268

1893

593

63

315

51420

Grand Total (a+b)

20618

686

645

1175

7876

395

308

6721

38424

9286

1326

6630

36353750

Participation in
percentage

53.66

1.79

1.68

3.06

20.50

1.03

0.80

17.49

100.00

24.17

b) NERC

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

10

11 12

13

14 15

S Venkatadri
P SivaRam
Y Gangi Reddy

NIRD&PR

29

Shankar Chatterjee

DDU SIRD
Lucknow

5

5

6

6-8
Apr

Overall effectiveness in percentage

9

4

Venue

Female

8

Faculty

Total

International

7

Duration

Others (PSUs / Individuals)

Univ. / Colleges

3

Natl. / State Instts for Res. & Trg

2

Title of the Programme

Vol. Orgns/ NGOs

1

Type

ZP & PRIs

Code

Bankers & Comm Orgns.

S.
No.

Govt. Officials

TRAINING CALENDAR: 2015-16

16

17

18

29

1

78

27

2

82

APRIL 2015
1

CRI151601

ToT - I

Book-Keeping and Accountancy for IAY

2

CPME151601

Regional

Planning and Management of Micro-Enterprises for SHGs 6-10
Apr

6

16

UP
3

4

5

6

CWEPA

CWEPA151602

CRI151602

CWEPA1516

ToT

Training

ToT - I

ToT

SAMARTHYA-SAGY

7-10

G Rajanikanth

SIRD

Apr

and Team

UP

Training for State Resource Teams Technical

7-10

V Suresh Babu

under MGNREGA

Apr
9 - 11

S Venkatadri

Apr

P SivaRam
Y Gangi Reddy

10-11
Apr

G Rajanikanth
C Dheeraja

Book-Keeping and Accountancy for IAY

Barefoot Engineers under MGNREGA

32

32

NIRD&PR

49

49

4

NIRD&PR

20

20

2

NIRD&PR

9

19

3

31

NA

NA

NA

143

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II

144

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

7

1

2

15

1

17

18

7

CWEPA151605

ToT

Barefoot Engineers under MGNREGA (2nd Batch)

10-11
Apr

G Rajanikanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

4

8

CWEPA151604

Training

Training for State Resource Teams (Technical)
under MGNREGA

14-17
Apr

V Suresh Babu

NIRD&PR

40

40

9

CRI151603

ToT - I

Book-Keeping and Accountancy for IAY

15 - 17
Apr

Y Gangi Reddy
and Team

NIRD&PR

19

19

10

CWEPA151606

Regional

SAMARTHYA-SAGY

15-17
Apr

V Suresh Babu
and Team

SIRD
Mysore
Karnataka

27

8

35

11

CWEPA

ToT

SAMARTHYA-SAGY

16-18
Apr

G Rajanikanth
and Team

NDMI Gujarat

19

7

26

12

CWEPA1516

Training

Barefoot Engineers under MGNREGA

16-29
Apr

G Rajanikanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

14

12

26

13

CRI151604

ToT - I

Book-Keeping and Accountancy for IAY

20 - 22
Apr

Y Gangi Reddy
and Team

NIRD&PR

22

22

14

CWLR151601

Regional

Management of Watershed Projects for
Sustainable Development (DoLR)

20-24
Apr

Siddayya
U Hemantha Kumar

ANS-SIRD
Mysuru

24

24

1

86

21

3

73

2

Karnataka
15

CSERE151601

Regional

Promotion of Sustainable Rural Livelihoods

T G Ramaiah

UIRD
Rudrapur

5

9

6

1

Uttarakhand
16

CHRD151601

Training

Horizontal Learning of Practices on
Development Governance

20-24

M Sarumathy

Apr

Gyanmudra

NIRD&PR

31

31

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

20-24
Apr

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamil Nadu

54

TPIP&RD
Raipur

29

17

CGARD151601

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Watershed Projects

20–25
Apr

T Phanindra Kumar
D S R Murthy

18

CGARD151602

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Watershed Projects

20-25
Apr

P Kesava Rao
V Madhava Rao

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

2

16

17

18

54

1

90

31

90

Chhattisgarh
19

CPME151602

Regional

Planning for Promotion of Integrated Farming
for Sustainable Development

20

CWEPA1516

International

Orientation Programme on Poverty Alleviation and
RD programmes for Nepal Deligation

20–25

G V Krishna Lohi Das

Apr
20-27
Apr

Patna

38

38

6

90

Bihar
G Rajanikanth

NIRD&PR

12

12

C Dheeraja
SVR

21

CWEPA151608

Regional

SAMARTHYA-SAGY

21-23
Apr

G Rajanikanth
and Team

SIRD ASSAM

24

22

CWEPA151609

Training

Training for State Resource Teams (Technical)
under MGNREGA

21-24
Apr

V Suresh Babu

NIRD&PR

23

23

2

88

23

CSERE1516

Training

Corporate Social Responsibility in Rural Development

23-24
Apr

R Murugesan
N V Madhuri

NIRD&PR

34

34

7

84

24

CRI151605

ToT - I

Book-Keeping and Accountancy for IAY

27-29
Apr

Y Gangi Reddy
and Team

NIRD&PR

25

25

2

74

25

CRI151606

Workshop

Solid Waste Management under SBA

27-29

R Ramesh

NIRD&PR

8

17

2

Apr

P SivaRam

27 Apr -

B K Swain

26

CRCDB151601

Regional

Micro-Entrepreneurship Development

1 May

OGB

9

3

32

5

33

1

32

Bhubaneswar
Odisha

145

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

146

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1
27

28

2
CIT151601

CSERE151602

3

4

5

6

7

8

Training

ICT Applications for Management of Rural

27 Apr -

G V Satya Narayana

NIRD&PR

17

Development Programmes

1 May

P Satish Chandra

Innovative Strategies for Marketing of Rural Products

Apr 27-

N V Madhuri

SIRD

32

1 May

Shankar Chatterjee

Regional

10

11 12

13

14 15

5

16

17

18

22

1

88

32

8

82

28

7

80

Ahemdabad
Gujarat

29

CWDGS151601

Regional

Strategies for Empowerment of Rural Women

27 Apr 1 May

C S Singhal

HIRD
Nilokheri
Haryana

27

30

CWEPA

Training

Barefoot Engineers under MGNREGA

27 Apr 9 May

G Rajanikanth
C Dheeraja

NIRD&PR

27

31

CHRD

Training

SAMARTHYA-SAGY

28 - 30
Apr

Gyanmudra
M Sarumathy

NIRD&PR

60

32

CWEPA

Training

SAMARTHYA-SAGY

28-30
Apr

G Rajanikanth
and Team

SIRD
Jabalpur

31

33

CWEPA

Training

SAMARTHYA-SAGY

28-30
Apr

V Suresh Babu

NIRD&PR

42

34

CWEPA151611

Training

Training for State Resource Teams Technical
under MGNREGA

28 Apr 1st May

V Suresh Babu

NIRD&PR

25

Total

9

814

1

4

38

49

31

NA

60

NA

14

45

NA

42

84

NA

133

21

4

12

2

25

2

1073

53

86

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

22

4

88

37

2

80

5

45

3

7

36

NA

22

88

18

NA

40

NA

NA

MAY 2015
1

CWLR151603

Training

Planning for Production Systems and
Livelihoods in IWMP (DoLR)

4-8
May

Ch Radhika Rani
Siddayya

NIRD&PR

18

4

2

CRI151608

Training

Training Cum Exposure on Swachch Bharat Abhiyan

4-9
May

P SivaRam
and Team

NIRD&PR

29

4

3

CPR151603

Workshop

Integrated District Planning for Local Self- Governments

5-6
May

Y Bhaskar Rao

4

CWEPA151613

Training

SAMARTHYA-SAGY

5- 7
May

V Suresh Babu
and Team

NIRD&PR

29

5

CWEPA151614

Training

Training for State Resource Teams Technical
under MGNREGA

5-8
May

V Suresh Babu

NIRD&PR

22

6

CRCDB151602

Workshop

Workshop for the Heads of Priority Sector
Department of all SCBs & RRBs

8-9
May

V R M Rao
R Koteswara Rao

NIRD&PR

7

CWEPA151615

Regional

SAMARTHYA-SAGY

11 - 13
May

G Rajanikanth
and Team

MGSIPA
Chandigarh
Punjab

23

8

CHRD

Regional

SAMARTHYA-SAGY

11-13
May

Gyanmudra
M Sarumathy

MGSIPA
Chandigarh
Punjab

65

65

9

CGARD151604

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Rural Development Projects

11–16
May

D S R Murthy
T Phanindra Kumar

SIPRD
Kalyani
West Bengal

21

21

10

CWEPA151616

Training

Training for State Resource Teams Technical
under MGNREGA

12 - 15
May

V Suresh Babu

NIRD&PR

17

17

88

11

CPR151608

Training

Integrated District Planning and Tribal
Self-Governance in PESA Areas

12-16
May

Ajit Kumar

SIRD
Ahemdabad
Gujarat

20

26

86

12

CGARD151606

Training

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of MGNREGS

18-23
May

P Kesava Rao
V Madhava Rao

NIRD&PR

27

Usaraha GP
25
Ambedkar Nagar Dist
UP

15

4

18

17

1

5

2

29

2

3

86

92

147

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

148

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

13

CPR151609

Workshop

Integrated District Planning for Local Self- Governments 19-20
May

Pratyusna Patnaik

Odisha

27

12

14

CASDM151602

Workshop

Initiatives to Natural Disasters in India : A Road Map
to Achieve Disaster Resilience

19-20
May

E V Prakash Rao
K Suman Chandra

NIRD&PR

24

1

15

CASDM151604

Consultation

Policy Perspectives and State Response to Agrarian
Crisis and Farmers’ distress

21-22
May

K Suman Chandra
E V Prakash Rao

NIRD&PR

31

16

CWLR151605

Workshop

Impact of Climate Change on water resources

21-22
May

Siddayya
and Team

NRD&PR

18

7

17

CPME151606

Regional

Planning and Management of Micro-enterprises for SHGs 25-29
May

Shankar Chatterjee

TPIRD
Raipur
Chhattisgarh

16

3

18

CHRD151602

Training

Research Methods for RD&PR Professionals

25 May3 Jun

Gyanmudra
Satish Chandra

NIRD&PR

19

CWEPA

Training

Training for State Resource Teams Technical
under MGNREGA

26-29
May

V Suresh Babu
and Team

NERC

Total

13

14 15

16

17

39

13

4

6

35

4

1

14

46

14

2

8

18

35

21

1

90

42

42

11

86

24

24

478

18

29

52

2

11

10

0

22

620

57 784

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

NIRD&PR

17

21

3

88

NERC

25

25

NIRD&PR

30

30

IMPA&RD

18

19

3

70

42

11

80

27

5

78

JUNE 2015
1

2

CWEPA151620

CWEPA151621

Training

Regional

Social Audit in MGNREGS

1-5

C Dheeraja

Jun

G Rajanikanth

Training for State Resource Teams Technical

2-5

V Suresh Babu

under MGNREGA

June

4

Guwahati
Assam

3

4

CIT

CSERE151604

Training

Regional

Orientation on E-Office

Promotion of Sustainable Rural Livelihoods

8-9

K Rajeshwar

Jun

and Team

8-12

T G Ramaiah

Jun

1

Srinagar
J&K

5

6

7

CHRD151603

CWDGS151602

CIT

Training

Training

Training

Strategies for Promoting and Protecting Child

8-12

Rights for ICDS Officials

Jun

Promotion of Livelihoods for Rural Women

Orientation on E-Office

M Sarumathy

NIRD&PR

42

8-12

Lakhan Singh

NIRD&PR

26

Jun

C S Singhal
NIRD&PR

35

35

NA

NIRD&PR

35

35

NA

NIRD&PR

35

35

NA

10-12
Jun

8

CIT

Training

Orientation on E-Office

13-Jun

K Rajeshwar

1

and Team
K Rajeshwar
and Team

9

RTD

Colloquium

Colloquium

15-Jun

R P Achari
V K Reddy

149

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

150

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1
10

11

2
CMRD151602

CPME1516

3
Training

Regional

4

CRCDB

Training

CWLR151607

Regional

7

8
15

15-19

Anil Takalkar

SIRD

Dissemination of Development Information

Jun

T Rama Devi

Kerala

G V Krishna Lohi Das

Patna

Planning for Creation of Durable and Sustainable

Induction Programme for Newly recruited Agricultural
Officers of Syndicate Bank

13

6

Web Content Desgin and Management for

Assets under MGNREGS
12

5

15-20
Jun
15-27

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

17

18

1

88

25

9

86

21

21

3

88

29

29

16

80

27

13

82

4

80

8

16
23

36

36

Bihar
R Koteswara Rao

NIRD&PR

35

35

Jun

Strategies for Participation of Stakeholders in

17-21

K Prabhakar

ANS-SIRD

IWMP (DoLR)

Aug

Siddayya

Mysuru

22

3

Karnataka
14

CSERE151605

Training

Implementation Strategies and Institutional

19-22

N V Madhuri

SIRD

Mechanisams for NRLM

May

R Murugesan

Ahmedabad
Gujarat

15

CWLR151609

Regional

Strategies for Promoting Smallholders’
Micro-Enterprises and Livelihoods (DoLR)

22-26

U Hemantha Kumar

SIRD

Jun

T Phanindra Kumar

Kottarkara
Kerala

16

CWDGS151603

Regional

Strategies for Empowerment of Rural Women

22-26

C S Singhal

Jun

UIRD

22

5

Rudrapur
Uttarakhand

CMRD151601

Training

Behavioural Skills for Managing RD Programmes

22-26

Yogananda Sastry

NIRD&PR

13

SIPRD

29

2

3

1

19

Jun
18

CPME151608

Regional

Planning, Implementation, Monitoring & Evaluation
of Micro - Enterprises

22-26
Jun

Shankar Chatterjee

1

2

2

34

Kalyani
West Bengal

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

17

1

2

3

19

CGARD151608

Regional

4
Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Watershed Projects

5
22-27
Jun

6
P Kesava Rao
Siddayya

7

8

SIRD

17

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

2

16

17

18

19

2

94

41

6

84

34

5

90

49

13

80

661

94

Ahmedabad
Gujarat

20

CESD151602

Training

Community Participation and Social Mobilisation for
Universalisation of Education

21

CRCDB151609

Training

Induction programme for Newly Recruited Agricultural
Field Officers of Dena Bank

22

CRI

Training

22-27
Jun
29 Jun4 Jul

T Vijaya Kumar

40

1

R R Prasad
V R M Rao

NIRD&PR

34

R Koteswara Rao

NIRDPR and NCRI Collaborative Programme on Swachh 29 Jun-

P SivaRam

Bharat: Innovations in Management of RDWS

R Ramesh

3 Jul

NIRD&PR

NIRD&PR

46

3

programmes
Total

553

71

2

27

1

4

0

3

151

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

152

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

NIRD&PR

33

39

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

35

10

82

39

10

92

38

3

82

43

6

74

JULY 2015
1

CRI

Training cum Swachh Bharat Mission
Exposure Visit

6-10
Jul

R Ramesh
P SivaRam

2

2

CGARD151609

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Rural Development Programmes

6-11
Jul

P Raj Kumar
T Phanindra Kumar

SIRD
Bhubaneswar
Odisha

3

CRCDB151605

Training

Induction Programme for Newly recruited Agricultural
Officers of Syndicate Bank

6-18
Jul

R Koteswara Rao

NIRD&PR

4

CHRD151604

Workshop

Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana

8-10
July

Gyanmudra
M Sarumathy
Sucharita Pujari

NIRD&PR

70

5

CIT151602

Training

ICT Applications for Management of Rural
Development Programmes

13-17
Jul

G V Satya Narayana
P Satish Chandra

NIRD&PR

22

6

CWLR151604

Regional

Participatory Management of Natural Resources (DoLR)

13-17
Jul

U Hemantha Kumar
Siddayya

TPIP&RD
Raipur
Chhattisgarh

42

7

CMRD151603

Training

Human Factors in Rural Development

13-17
Jul

Yogananda Sastry

NIRD&PR

30

8

CASDM151601I

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Community Based Disaster Management :
Mainstreaming and Risk Reduction Strategies

20 Jul 16 Aug

K Suman Chandra
E V Prakash Rao

NIRD&PR

12

12

3

88

9

CRI151601I

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Planning and Management of Drinking Water
and Sanitation projects

20 Jul 16 Aug

P SivaRam
Y Gangi Reddy

NIRD&PR

22

22

3

90

10

CPME151609

Regional

Planning and Management of
Micro-enterprises for SHGs

20-24
Jul

Shankar Chatterjee

DDU SIRD
Lucknow
UP

35

3

82

37

70

13

3

1

30

2

9

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

24

37

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

HIPA
Shimla
HP

33

11

CWLR151610

Regional

Management of Watershed Projects in Hilly Areas (DoLR) 20-24
Jul

Siddayya
Ch Radhika Rani

12

CWDGS151604

Training

Strategies for Women Participation in MGNREGS

20-24
Jul

Lakhan Singh
C S Singhal

NIRD&PR

33

13

CGARD151610

Training

Modern Survey Techniques for Planning and
Management of PMGSY (MoRD)

20-25
Jul

P Kesava Rao
T P Kumar

NIRD&PR

43

14

CRCDB151611

Training

Investment Credit and Appraisal of Agriculture term
loan proposals for the officers of Allahabad bank

20-24
Jul

V R M Rao
R Koteswara Rao

NIRD&PR

15

CGARD151611

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Watershed Projects

27–31
Jul

D S R Murthy
T Phanindra Kumar

SIRD
Ranchi
Jharkhand

16

CRCDB151614

Training

Agricultural Finance (Rural & Investment Credit) for
Agricultural Officers of Syndicate Bank

27-31
Jul

R Koteswara Rao
V R M Rao

NIRD&PR

17

CHRD

Workshop

Training Need Analysis for MoPR Officials

28-Jul

Gyanmudra
M Sarumathy

MoPR
New Delhi

Total

9

10

11 12

16

13

14 15

4

26

71

38

45

485

16

17

18

33

5

88

53

6

86

43

9

84

26

3

90

71

16

88

38

14

45

101 29

5

7

0

34

9

670

91

153

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

154

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

25

3

78

79

9

82

35

2

50

17

92

24

5

88

AUGUST 2015
CWLR151613

Training

Institutionalization of Best Practices of Social
Audits in IWMP (DoLR)

3-7
Aug

K Prabhakar
Ch Radhika Rani

NIRD&PR

24

2

CPME151610

Training

Participatory Village Development under SAGY

3-7
Aug

R Chinnadurai
Aruna Jayamani

NIRD&PR

71

3

CRI151629

Regional

Participatory Approaches for Irrigation Management

3-7
Aug

Y Gangi Reddy
S Venkatadri

NIRD&PR

35

4

CGARD151612

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Rural Development Projects

3-8
Aug

V Madhava Rao
P Kesava Rao

5

CRCDB151612

Training

Officers of Allahabad Bank on Investment Credit and
Appraisal of Agriculture Term Loan Proposals

3-7
Aug

R Koteswara Rao
V R M Rao

NIRD&PR

6

CPR

Workshop

State Finance Commissions in the Context of
Panchayat Finances

10-11
Aug

K S Subrahmanyam

NIRD&PR

26

7

CIT151603

Training

Information Technology for Effective Management
of Rural Development Programmes

10-14
Aug

P Satish Chandra
G V Satya Narayana

NIRD&PR

16

8

CGARD1516

Regional

Geo-informatics Applications in Planning and
management of Watershed Projects

10-14
Aug

H K Solnaki

TPIP&RD
Raipur
Chhattisgarh

46

9

CWEPA151629

Regional

Village Development Plan under SAGY

10-14
Aug

V Suresh Babu
G Rajanikanth

ANS-SIRD
Mysuru
Karnataka

27

10

CSERE151607

Regional

Strategic Financial Management under NRLM

10-14
Aug

R Murugesan

SIRD
Aizwal
Mizoram

15

11

CRCDB

Training

Induction programme for Newly Recruited
Agricultural Field Officers of Syndicate Bank

10-14 Aug

R Koteswara Rao
V R M Rao

NIRD&PR

1

5

3

Andaman & Nicobar 48
Islands

2

24

26

5

7

6

2

4

34

5

90

1

47

5

86

33

1

86

5

90

15

36

36

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8
29

12

CWLR151614

Regional

Strategies for Promoting Smallholders MicroEnterprises and Livelihoods in IWMP (DoLR)

17-21 Aug

U Hemantha Kumar

SIRD
Barapani
Meghalaya

13

CRCDB151613

Training

Induction programme for Newly Recruited
Agricultural Field Officers of Dena Bank

17-22 Aug

V R M Rao
R Koteswara Rao

NIRD&PR

14

CPME

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Planning and Management of Rural
Development Programmes

17 Aug 13 Sep

K P Kumaran
R Chinnadurai
Aruna Jayamani

NIRD & PR

15

CWEPA1516

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Participatory Rural Development

17 Aug 13 Sep

G Rajanikanth
C Dheeraja

NIRD&PR

16

CGARD

Regional

District Rural Roads Plan on GIS platform
for PMGSY-II

18-20 Aug

T Phanindra Kumar
DSR Murthy

17

CWDGS151605

Workshop

Gender Budgeting for Rural Development

19-21 Aug

18

CPME151611

Training

Decentralised District Planning for Members of DPCs

24-28 Aug

19

CPR

Training

20

CRCDB151604

21

22

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

35

20

9

16

17

18

29

7

88

35

9

84

20

7

86

9

2

88

86

SIRD
Kottarakara
Kerala

27

27

13

C S Singhal
Lakhan Singh

NIRD&PR

38

38

19

R Aruna Jayamani
R Chinnadurai

NIRD&PR

37

5

43

6

84

PR Administration and RD of Elected Representatives 24-28 Aug
as well as Officials of three tier PRIs of the Odisha State

Y Bhaskar Rao

NIRD&PR

1

38

39

8

86

Regional

Effective Credit Delivery Management

24-28 Aug

B K Swain

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

CGARD1516

Training

Open Source QGIS and GPS Applications
for IWMP and MGNREGS

24-29 Aug

H K Solanki

NIRD&PR

23

1

6

90

CGARD151614

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Rural Development Programmes

24-29 Aug

P Raj Kumar
T Phanindra Kumar

Patna
Bihar

24

2

1

33

33

5

29

4

30

86

155

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

156

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

23

CWEPA1516

Training

IPPE-II, One day orientation programme for State
Nodal Officers of SRLM

24

CWEPA1516

Training

25

CPME151612

26

5

6

7

8

25-Aug

G Rajanikanth

NIRD&PR

32

IPPE-II, National Level trainers for experts on
livelihood & participatory planning for CSOs

25-27Aug

G Rajanikanth

NIRD&PR

10

Training

Monitoring and Evaluation of RD Projects

26-29 Aug

P K Nath
R Chinnadurai

NIRD&PR

19

CRI

ToT

Swachh Bharat Mission : Social Marketing Startegies
for Sanitation Professionals

31 Aug 4 Sep

R Ramesh
P SivaRam

NIRD&PR

20

27

CRI

ToT

IEC and Social Audit for IAY

31 Aug 4 Sep

Y Gangi Reddy
P SivaRam

NIRD&PR

21

28

CPME151613

Training

Planning for Sustainable Alternate Livelihoods

31 Aug 4 Sep

G V Krishna Lohi Das

NIRD&PR

16

29

CWLR151612

Regional

Technology and Institutional Arrangements for
Water Resource Management in IWMP (DoLR)

31 Aug 4 Sep

U Hemantha Kumar
P Kesava Rao

SIRD
Ranchi
Jharkhand

23

30

CRCDB151614

Training

Agricultural Finance (Rural & Investment Credit) for
Agricultural Officers of Syndicate Bank

31 Aug 4 Sep

R Koteswara Rao
V R M Rao

NIRD&PR

Total

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

45

6

3

1

9

1

37

648 165

59

66

3

21

9

16

17

32

3

55

2

19

12

82

39

6

84

21

2

84

17

6

80

23

3

92

37

9

80

8

18

979 172

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

SEPTEMBER 2015
1

CWLR151617

Regional

Strategies for Sustainable Management of Rainwater (DoLR)7-11 Sep

Siddayya
P Kesava Rao

IMPA&RD
Srinagar
J&K

46

46

10

76

2

CSERE151608

Regional

Promotion of Sustainable Rural Livelihoods

7-11 Sep

T G Ramaiah

DDU SIRD
Lucknow
UP

29

29

5

90

3

CIT151604

Training

ICT Applications and e-Governance

7-11 Sep

P Satish Chandra
G V Satya Narayana

NIRD&PR

16

5

29

2

88

4

CPME151614

Training

Formulation and Appraisal of RD Programmes

7-11 Sep

G V Raju

NIRD&PR

10

6

16

2

78

5

CPME151615

Regional

Participatory District Planning through PRIs

7-11 Sep

R Chinnadurai

NIRD&PR

2

19

4

82

6

CGARD1516

Regional

Geoc Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Rural Development

7-12 Sep

H K Solanki

DDU-SIRD
Lucknow
UP

39

40

1

86

7

CGARD151615

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Rural Development

7–11 Sep

D S R Murthy
T Phanindra Kumar

SIRD
Raipur

23

23

8

CWEPA1516

ToT

Training for State Resource Teams Technical
under MGNREGA

8-11 Sep

V Suresh Babu
G Rajanikanth

NIRD&PR

20

20

2

9

CWDGS151606

Regional

Promotion of Livelihoods for Rural Women

8-12 Sep

C S Singhal

SIRD
Bhubaneswar
Odisha

24

26

12

10

CWEPA1516

National ReviewNational review meeting of
Cluster facilitation Team

14-15 Sep

G Rajanikanth

Delhi

15

11

RSETI151603

Workshop

14-16 Sep

O N Bansal

NIRD&PR

35

Management of RSETIs

2

5

1

17
1

2

62

84

77

35

157

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

158

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8
19

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

17

18

26

6

82

12

CESD151605

Training

Social Development of Rural Women

14-18 Sep

G Valentina

NIRD&PR

13

CRI151602I

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Planning and Management of Rural Housing and
Habitat Projects

14 Sep 11 Oct

Y Gangi Reddy
P SivaRam

NIRD&PR

14

14

14

CHRD

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Training Methodology for Development Professionals

14 Sep11 Oct

Gyanmudra
M Sarumathy

NIRD&PR

18

18

7

88

15

CPR

Training

Panchayati Raj Administration and Rural Development 21-25 Sep

Ajit Kumar

NIRD&PR

1

36

8

84

16

CWEPA151630

Training

MGNREGS Operational Guidelines – 2013
(with Revised Schedules)

21-25 Sep

C Dheeraja
G Rajanikanth

NIRD&PR

15

5

20

2

84

17

CWLR151619

Regional

Participatory Management of
Natural Resources (DoLR)

21-25 Sep

U Hemantha Kumar
P Kesava Rao

SIPARD
Agartala
Tripura

42

1

43

1

82

18

CSERE151611

Regional

Appropriate Technology for Rural Livelihoods

21-25 Sep

R Murugesan

SIRD
Karfectar
Sikkim

16

19

CRCDB151616

Training

Induction programme for Newly Recruited
Agricultural Field Officers of Dena Bank

21 - 26 Sep

R Koteswara Rao
V R M Rao

NIRD&PR

23

5

84

20

CPME151616

Regional

Participatory Planning for Development of
Rural Livelihoods

22-26 Sep

K P Kumaran
R Chinnadurai

39

5

88

21

CPR

Workshop

Certificate Course for Panchayat Secretaries on
Ensuring Good Governance in GPs

28-Sep

22

CPR

Workshop

Curriculam Development of Certificate Course for
Panchayat Secretaries

23

CWEPA1516

Writeshop

Module and Material Development to build the
Capacities of GRS

35

16

23

SIRD
Kottarakara
Kerala

39

Pratyusna Patnaik

SIRD
Raipur

53

14

67

6

28-Sep

Y Bhaskar Rao

SIRD
Tripura

1

35

36

8

28 Sep1 Oct

V Suresh Babu

NIRD&PR

4

15

1

713

87

449

11

23

86

108

1

13

32

1

86

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Total

7

16

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

OCTOBER 2015
1

CMRD151604

Regional

Design of Products and Services for Dissemination
of Development Information

5-9 Oct

Anil Takalkar
T Rama Devi

NERC
Assam

15

2

CPR

Orientation
Training
Programme

Orientation Training Programme to Functionaries
of PRIs (Lakshadweep)

5-9 Oct

Y Bhaskar Rao

NIRD&PR

1

3

CWDGS

Workshop

Development of Case Studies in Rural Development

5-9 Oct

C S Singhal

NIRD&PR

27

4

CPME151619

Regional

Planning and Management of
Micro-enterprises for SHGs

5-9 Oct

Shankar Chatterjee

SIRD
Ranchi
Jharkhand

30

5

CWEPA151622

Training

Poverty and Inequality Estimation for Statistical
Personnel of DES (ISS)

5-9 Oct

SV Rangacharyulu
G Rajanikanth

NIRD&PR

6

CRI151635

ToT

Participatory Approaches for Irrigation Management

5-9 Oct

S Venkatadri
Y Gangi Reddy

7

CGARD151616

Training

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Watershed Projects

5-10 Oct

8

CRI151636

ToT

Behaviour Change Communication for Rural
Sanitation Professionals under SBA

9

CWDGS151601I

International
ITEC/SCAAP

10

CRCDB151617

11

CRCDB151618

4

19

28

29

80

27

6

39

24

86

22

22

3

82

NIRD&PR

16

16

2

76

P Kesava Rao
Siddayya

NIRD&PR

28

5

38

3

90

5-9 Oct

R Ramesh
P SivaRam

NIRD&PR

19

8

27

9

82

Empowerment of Women for Rural development

12 Oct 8 Nov

C S Singhal
Lakhan Singh

NIRD&PR

22

17

78

Regional

Rural Credit for Poverty Alleviation

12-16 Oct

B K Swain

Training

Agricultural Finance (Rural & Investment Credit)
for Agricultural Officers of Bank of Maharashtra

12-16 Oct

R Koteswara Rao
V R M Rao

8

1

5

22

UIRD
Rudrapur
Uttarakhand

29

29

12

NIRD&PR

27

27

2

80

159

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

160

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

12-16 Oct

K Suman Chandra

NIRD&PR

51

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

10

80

90

12

CASDM

Training

Capacity Building Programme for the Officers
of Intelligence Department

13

CPR

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Good Governance and Management of RD programmes 12 Oct 8 Nov

K Jayalakshmi

NIRD&PR

23

23

14

CWEPA1516

International
CIRDAP

Sustainable Agriculture for Rural Development

25 Oct 4 Nov

V Suresh Babu

NIRD&PR

16

16

15

CASDM

Training

Capacity Building Programme for the Officers
of Intelligence Department

26-30 Oct

K Suman Chandra

NIRD&PR

16

CRCDB151619

Training

Rural Credit Management

26-31 Oct

V R M Rao
R Koteswara Rao

NIRD&PR

17

CWEPA

Regional

Exposure Visit of Ghana Delegation

30 Oct

G Rajanikanth

NIRD&PR

20

20

18

CHRD151606

Training

Sensitisation on Sexual Harrassment to Women
Elected Representatives

26-31 Oct

Sucharita Pujari
M Sarumathy

NIRD&PR

22

22

22

500

110

Total

51

50

50

23

301

87

23

28

18

0

5

61

0

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

NIRD&PR

35

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

3

86

2

90

NOVEMBER 2015
1

CWEPA151631

Training

Social Audit in MGNREGS

2-6 Nov

C Dheeraja
G Rajani Kanth

7

2

CGARD151617

Regional

Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana

2– 6 Nov

T Phanindra Kumar
D S R Murthy

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamil Nadu

47

47

3

CASDM

Training

Capacity Building Programme for the Officers of
Intelligence Department

2-6 Nov

K Suman Chandra

NIRD&PR

50

50

4

CGARD151618

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Rural Development Programmes

2-7 Nov

P Raj Kumar
P Kesava Rao

TPIP&RD
Raipur
Chhattisgarh

27

27

5

CWEPA

Tot

MGNREGA Functionaries of the MoRD-GIZ Project

4-6 Nov

G Rajanikanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

6

CWLR

Workshop

Integrated Water Resource Management:
Issues and Options

6-7 Nov

Ch Radhika Rani
U H Kumar

NIRD&PR

7

CESD151601I

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Community Driven Rural Development

9 Nov 20 Dec

R R Prasad
T Vijay Kumar

NIRD&PR

8

CGARD151601I

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Geo-informatics Applications in Rural Development

9 Nov 20 Dec

V Madhava Rao
P Kesava Rao

NIRD&PR

9

CIT151606

Training

Information Technology and Project Management

14-18 Dec

G V Satya Narayana
P Satish Chandra

NIRD&PR

8

10

CWLR151624

Regional

Technology and Institutional Arrangements for Water 16-20 Nov
Resource Management in IWMP (DoLR)

Ch Radhika Rani
U Hemantha Kumar

YASHADA
Pune
Maharashtra

16

11

CRCDB151620

Regional

Micro-Enterprise Development

16-20 Nov

B K Swain

SIRD
Nilokheri
Haryana

12

CESD151607

Regional

Social Sector Development in Rural Areas

16-20 Nov

G Valentina

SIRD
Goa

26

4

24

34

34

2

32

8

15

15

7

82

14

14

3

85

8

3

12

22

42

19

84

28

92

22

78

24

6

91

161

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

162

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

2

88

13

CPME151624

Regional

Planning for Sustainable Coastal Livelihoods

16-20 Nov

G V Raju

ANS-SIRD
Mysuru
Karnataka

14

14

14

CWEPA

Consultation

Consultative Committee Meeting on Rural
Development, PR, DWS

18-19 Nov

G Rajanikanth
C Dheeraja

NIRD&PR

34

34

15

CWEPA

Workshop

Good Practices under MGNREGA

20-21 Nov

G Rajanikanth
C Dheeraja

NIRD&PR

87

16

CWEPA

ToT

Programme for Barefoot Technicians under MGNREGA 20-22 Nov

G Rajanikanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

15

15

17

CWEPA

ToT

Programme for Barefoot Technicians under MGNREGA 20-30 Nov

G Rajanikanth
and Team

NIRD&PR

51

51

18

CRI151639

Training

Training Cum Exposure on Swachch Bharat Abhiyan

23-27 Nov

P SivaRam
R Ramesh

NIRD&PR

41

19

CASDM

Training

Capacity Building Programme for the Officers of
Intelligence Department

23-27 Nov

K Suman Chandra

NIRD&PR

47

20

CWLR151625

Training

Sustainable Production and Income Generation
under IWMP (DoLR)

23-27 Nov

Ch Radhika Rani
Siddayya

NIRD&PR

24

21

CPR151602I

International
CIRDAP

Local Governance and Delivery of Services for
Rural Development

29 Nov 9 Dec

Y Bhaskar Rao

NIRD&PR

22

CASDM

Training

Capacity Building Programme for the Officers of
Intelligence Department

30 Nov 4 Dec

K Suman Chandra

NIRD&PR

54

54

23

CGARD

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Watershed Projects

30 Nov - 4 Dec

DSR Murthy
T Phanindra Kumar

SIRD
Jharkhand

49

49

24

CRCDB151622

Training

Appraisal of Agriculture and Animal
Husbandry Schemes

R Koteswara Rao
V R M Rao

NIRD&PR

92

7

1

49

47

4

28

17

57

10

80

6

90

17

35

649

3

35

12

71

3

1

46

0

839

50

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Total

30 Nov 4 Dec

5

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

DECEMBER 2015
1

CPR

CPR1516

Strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions and
Promoting Effective Rural Development

5-Dec

Ajit Kumar

Mayabunder
& Rangat

17

69

86

24

2

CPR1516

CPR1516

Strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions and
Promoting Effective Rural Development

4-Dec

Ajit Kumar

Digilpur
A&N Islands

12

45

57

11

3

CPR1516

CPR1516

Strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions and
Promoting Effective Rural Development

2-Dec

Ajit Kumar

Port blair
A&N Islands

19

72

91

49

4

CPME

Training

Participatory Planning for Poverty Reduction
and Sustainable Development

7-11 Dec

R Chinnadurai
R A Jayamani

NIRD&PR

2

19

4

82

5

CGARD151619

Regional

Modern Survey Techniques for Planning and )
Management of PMGSY (MoRD

7-12 Dec

P Kesava Rao
H K Solanki

NIRD&PR

49

49

5

86

6

CHRD

Training

Refresher Programme on Methods of Training
and Research

7-12 Dec

Gyanmudra
M Sarumathy

NIRD&PR

8

8

7

CPME151627

Regional

Decentralised District Planning for Members of DPCs

14-18 Dec

R Aruna Jayamani

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamil Nadu

19

2

90

8

CRCDB151623

Regional

Micro-Enterprise Development

14-18 Dec

B K Swain

ANS-SIRD
Mysuru
Karnataka

19

2

80

9

CESD151608

Training

Social Development in Rural Areas

14-18 Dec

G Valentina

NIRD&PR

5

15

20

3

90

10

CPME

Training

Monitoring and Evaluation of RD Projects

16-22 Dec

G V Krishna Lohi Das
P K Nath

NIRD&PR

4

7

14

3

96

11

CSERE1516

Training

Strategies for Promotion of Micro Enterprises

28-31 Dec

N V Madhuri
Shankar Chatterjee

SIRD
Ahmedabad
Gujarat

34

34

8

82

416

111

Total

17

19

19

150

19 205

39

3

0

0

0

3

163

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

164

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

27

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

27

3

18

JANUARY 2016
1

CWLR

Workshop

Water Use Efficiency, Equity through
Participatory Irrigation Management

2-3 Jan

Siddayya
and Team

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

2

CRCDB151626

Training

Rural Credit Management

4 -6 Jan

R Koteswara Rao
V R M Rao

NIRD&PR

3

CGARD151622

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Watershed Projects

4 - 9 Jan

H K Solanki
V Madhava Rao

HIRD
Nilokheri
Haryana

31

4

CRI

ToT

IEC and Social Audit for IAY

4-9 Jan

Y Gangi Reddy
P SivaRam
R Ramesh

NIRD&PR

5

CPME151634

Regional

Impact Evaluation for Project Officers of
National Dairy Plan

4-9 Jan

G V Raju

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamilnadu

6

CGARD151602I

International
CIRDAP

Geo-informatics Applications in Rural
4-13 Jan
Development for sharing Innovative and Best Practices

V Madhava Rao
P Kesava Rao

NIRD&PR

7

CIT151601I

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Information Communication Technology
for Rural Development

4-31 Jan

P Satish Chandra
and Team

NIRD&PR

8

CWEPA

Training

Capacity Enhancement of Gram Rozgar Sahayaks (GRS)

5-7 Jan

C Dheeraja
G Rajani Kanth

NIRD&PR

18

18

9

CSERE1516

Training

Implementation Strategies and Institutional
Mechanisams for NRLM

12-15 Jan

N V Madhuri
S Chatterjee

DDU-SIRD
Lucknow

33

10

CWLR151630

Regional

Sustainable Production and Income Generation
under IWMP (DoLR)

18-22 Jan

Siddayya
T Phanindra Kumar

YASHADA
Pune
Maharashtra

24

27

27

3

6

90

28

28

4

23

23

3

74

16

16

2

90

21

21

10

90

33

5

88

24

1

94

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

34

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8
19

11

CWEPA

Training

Poverty and Ineaquality Estimation

18-22 Jan

G Rajanikanth
SV Rangacharyulu

NIRD&PR

12

CRCDB151627

Regional

Rural Credit Delivery and Recovery Management

18-21 Jan

B K Swain

UGB
Bolangir

13

CPME151629

Training

Formulation and Appraisal of RD Programmes

18-22 Jan

G V Raju

NIRD&PR

12

14

CPME151630

Training

Planning, Implementation, Monitoring & Evaluation
of Micro - Enterprises

18-22 Jan

Shankar Chatterjee

NIRD&PR

18

15

CWEPA

Training

Capacity Enhancement of Gram Rozgar Sahayaks (GRS) 19-21 Jan

C Dheeraja
G Rajanikanth

NIRD&PR

14

16

CPME151631

Training

Participatory Planning, Implementation and
Monitoing of RD Programmes

19-23 Jan

R Aruna Jayamani

NIRD&PR

13

17

CRI

Seminar

Rural Sanitation in India: Achivements,
Trends and Challenges

27-29 Jan

R Ramesh
P SivaRam
Y Gangi Reddy

NIRD&PR

19

18

CGARD1516

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Watershed Projects

27-30 Jan

T Phanindra Kumar
P Raj Kumar

SIRD
Bhubaneswar
Odisha

33

Total

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

17

18

25

1

92

15

4

82

42

6

84

19

25

312

16

3
18

6

3

17

13

1

70

1

3

9

4

4

17

26

82

44

37

0

33

12

459

57

92

165

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

166

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

FEBRUARY 2016
1

CRCDB151628

Training

Financing Poultry, Dairy & Fisheries Projects

1-5 Feb

V R M Rao
R Koteswara Rao

NIRD&PR

33

33

2

CWLR

Regional

Technology and Institutional Arrangements for
Water Resource Management in IWMP (DoLR)

1-5 Feb

Ch Radhika Rani
U H Kumar

YASHADA
Pune
Maharashtra

16

12

28

2

92

3

CWLR151633

Regional

Exchange Programme on Participatory Irrigation
Management, Advocating, Adoption/Enactment
and Motivation of WUAs

1-5 Feb

Siddayya

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamil Nadu

32

4

36

8

84

4

CWEPA

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Management of Rural Employement Projects
and Poverty Alleviation

1-28 Feb

V Suresh Babu
G Rajanikanth

NIRD&PR

19

19

5

CASDM151602I

International
ITEC/SCAAP

Sustainable Agricultural Strategies for
Rural Development

1-28 Feb

K Suman Chandra
E V Prakash Rao

NIRD&PR

26

26

10

78

6

CHRD

Seminar

The New Rural Paradigm: Policies and Governance

3-4 Feb

Gyanmudra
M Sarumathy

NIRD&PR

41

6

7

CPME151633

Regional

Participatory Project Planning for NGOs

8-12 Feb

R Chinnadurai

NIRD&PR

19

3

86

8

CGARD151623

Training

Planning and Management of PMGSY using
Geoinformatics & Modern Survey Techniques

8-13 Feb

P Kesava Rao

NIRD&PR

43

43

2

84

9

CGARD151624

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of Watershed Programmes

8-13 Feb

P Raj Kumar
T Phanindra Kumar

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamilnadu

30

30

10

CWDGS151608

Workshop

Gender Budgeting for Rural Development

10-12 Feb

C S Singhal

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

36

41

19

2

39

21

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

1

86

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

11

CPME

Training

Rural Development Intervention for R&R

15-19 Feb

P K Nath
G V Krishna Lohi Das

SIRD
Lucknow

24

12

CGARD1516

Regional

Geo Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of RD programmes

15-20 Feb

H K Solanki

SIRD
Ranchi
Jharkhand

27

13

CWEPA

ToT

Capacity Enhancement of Gram Rozgar Sahayaks (GRS) 16-18 Feb

V Suresh Babu

NIRD&PR

5

14

CWLR151635

Workshop

Strategies for Promoting Participatory
Irrigation Management

19-20 Feb

Siddayya
and Team

SIRD
Punjab

37

15

CWLR151634

Regional

Institutionalisation of Best Practices of Social
Auidts in IWMP (DoLR)

22-26 Feb

K Prabhakar

SIRD
MM Nagar
Tamil Nadu

38

16

CWLR151634

Regional

Water Use Efficiency, Equity through Participatory
Irrigation Management

22-26 Feb

Siddayya
and Team

YASHADA
Pune
Maharashtra

17

CHRD151609

Training

Preventive and Promotive Primary Health Care

22-26 Feb

Sucharita Pujari

18

CESD

Regional

Social Sector Development in Rural Areas

22-26 Feb

19

CGARD

Training

Geospatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of RD programmes

20

CIT151602I

International
CIRDAP

Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) Applications for Rural Development
Total

9

10

11 12

2

2

13

14 15

2

16

17

30

27

9

84

6

3

42

1

29

29

6

NIRD&PR

20

20

G Valentina

SIRD
Sikkim

46

46

29 Feb 5 Mar

H K Solanki

NIRD&PR

23

29 Feb 9 Mar

P Satish Chandra
G V Sathya Narayana

NIRD&PR

2

2

2

18

447

33

4

49

88

14
37

2

18

4

4

63

0

86

80

27

2

86

18

3

82

604

73

167

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)

168

ANNEXURE - II (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

23

9

10

11 12

13

14 15

16

17

18

23

2

94

MARCH 2016
1

CWLR151635

Regional

Orientation and Exchange programme of
Difficult and Over-exploited areas for Management of
Water Resources through Conservation,
Distribution and Efficient Use

1-5 Mar

K Prabhakar
Siddayya

ANS SIRD
Mysore
Karnataka

2

CRCDB151601I

International

Rural Credit for Poverty Reduction

1-28 Mar

B K Swain

NIRD&PR

3

CIT151608

Training

ICT Applications for Management of RD Programmes

7-11 Mar

G V Satya Narayana
P Satish Chandra

NIRD&PR

13

4

RTD151607

Regional

Training Methods and Skills

7-11 Mar

R P Achari
V K Reddy

NERC
Guwahati
Assam

2

5

CWDGS151607

Seminar

Strategies for Child and Women Survival

8-10 Mar

C S Singhal
Lakhan Singh

NIRD&PR

8

6

CPR

Workshop

Certificate Course for Panchayat Secretaries on
Ensuring Good Governance in GPs

10-Mar

Pratyusna Patnaik

SIRD
Raipur

43

7

CWEPA

ToT

Capacity Enhancement of Gram Rozgar Sahayaks (GRS) 21-23 Mar

NIRD&PR

16

Total

V Suresh Babu

14

105

9

1

8

14

4

26

6

82

5

16

4

84

32

18

128

7

3

21

85

2
1

94

13

18
9

21

14

0

257

37

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

9

10

11

12

13

14

Overall Effectiveness (%)

8

Female

7

Total

6

Others/PSUs/Individuals

5

International

4

Course Director/ Team

University/Collage

3

Venue

Natl. State Res.& Trg. Institutions

2

Duration

Vol. Organisation

1

Type of the Programme

ZP/PRIs/VDB/VC

Code

Bankers

S.
No.

Govt. Officials

NIRD&PR-NERC Programmes Conducted for the FY 2015-16

15

16

17

APRIL 2015
1

NERC151601 T

Value Chain Analysis for Promotion of
Rural Livelihoods

6-10 Apr

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

33

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

33

8

84

2

NERC151602 T

Profitable Poultry Farming and Management

6-11 Apr

NERC

K.K. Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

30

31

11

90

3

NERC151603 T

Orientation on Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana

8-10 Apr

NERC

M.K. Shrivastava

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

5

1

84

4

NERC151604 T

Profitable Pig Farming and Meat Processing

20-25 Apr

NERC

K.K. Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

27

28

17

92

5

NERC151605 T

Orientation on Swachh Bharat Mission

20-22 Apr

NERC

R M Pant
M.K. Shrivastava

33

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

35

7

94

6

NERC151606 T

Planning and Management of Watershed
Projects under IWMP

20 Apr7 May

NERC

K. Haloi
A. Simhachalam

17

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

17

4

84

Total

90

0

2

0

0

0

0

57

149

48

169

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - III

170

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

MAY-15
7

NERC151607 T

Profitable Poultry Farming and Management

4-9 May

NERC

K.K. Bhattacharjee

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

29

31

19

92

8

NERC151608 T

Prepration of Micro-Credit Plan under NRLM

12-14 May

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

45

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

46

18

84

9

NERC151609 T

Maintenance of Double Entry Accounting
System for RD Programmes

11-15 May

NERC

B.N. Sarma
R.M. Pant

44

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

44

9

84

10

NERC151610 T

Applications of Open Source Software in RD

11-15 May

NERC

S.K. Ghosh

18

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

20

2

92

11

NERC151612 T

Application of Geo-Spatial Technologies for
Rural Infrastructre Facility Mapping

25-29 May

SIRD
Sikkim

N.S.R. Prasad
A. Simhachalam

28

0

0

2

0

9

0

0

39

20

92

Total

137

0

0

4

1

9

0

29

180

68

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

JUNE, 2015
12

NERC151614 T

Profitable Pig Farming and Meat Processing

1-6 June

NERC

K.K. Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

29

30

25

92

13

NERC151617 T

Rural Entrepreneurship Development

9-12 June, 15

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

32

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

32

15

86

14

NERC151619 T

e-Governance Applications for
Rural Development

22-26 June

NERC

S.K. Ghosh

29

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

29

5

88

15

NERC151621 T

Orientation on Swachha Bharat Mission

22-26 June

NERC

N.S.R. Prasad
A. Simhachalam

71

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

74

17

82

16

NERC151622 T

Nursery Management Techniques
for Horticultural Crops

22-27 June

NERC

K.K. Bhattacharjee

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

26

28

12

90

17

NERC151615 T

ToT on Village Development Planning
under SAGY

29 June 3 July

NERC

K. Haloi
N.S.R. Prasad

14

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

15

3

82

Total

149

0

1

0

3

0

0

55

208

77

171

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)

172

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

A. Simhachalam
N.S.R. Prasad

19

B.N. Sarma
R.M. Pant

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

0

0

3

0

10

0

0

35

0

0

0

0

0

0

15

16

17

32

12

90

0

35

13

92

JULY, 2014
18

NERC151623 T

Application of Geo-Spatial Technologies for
Planning and Management of Watershed
Projects

6-10 Jul

SIPARD, Agartala

19

NERC151624 T

Maintenance of Double Entry Accounting
System for RD Programmes

6-10 Jul

SIRD Sikkim

20

NERC151616 T

Planning and Management of Natural
Resources under MGNREGS

13-17 July

NERC

M.K. Shrivastava

43

0

10

0

0

0

0

0

53

5

88

21

NERC151626 T

Village Development Planning under SAGY

20-24 Jul

NERC

K. Haloi
A. Simhachalam

15

0

6

0

0

0

0

0

21

5

84

Total

112

0

16

3

0

10

0

0

141

35

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

AUGUST, 2015
22

NERC151628 T

Profitable Pig Farming and Meat Processing

3-8 Aug

NERC

K.K. Bhattacharjee

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

27

29

21

88

23

NERC151629 T

Application of Geo-Spatial Technologies for
Planning and Management of Rural Roads

3-7 Aug

NERC

N.S.R. Prasad
A. Simhachalam

32

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

32

1

86

24

NERC151632 T

Maintenance of Double Entry Accounting
System for RD Programmes

17-21 Aug

NERC

B.N. Sarma
R.M. Pant

34

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

34

11

90

25

NERC151635 T

ICT Applications for e-Governance in
Rural Development

24-28 Aug

NERC

S.K. Ghosh

20

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

20

5

92

26

NERC151636 T

Planning and Management of Watershed
Projects under IWMP (SLNA, Assam)

24 Aug 10 Sep

NERC

K. Haloi
A. Simhachalam

13

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

13

3

90

27

NERC151620 T

Management Development Programme

24-28
Aug

SIRD
Itanagar
Arunachal Pradesh

R.M. Pant
M.K. Shrivastava

20

0

0

0

6

0

0

0

26

4

92

28

NERC151633 T

Value Chain Analysis for Promotion
of Rural Livelihoods

31 Aug Sept 4

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

22

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

24

10

88

Total

143

0

0

2

6

0

0

27

178

55

173

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)

174

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

SEPTEMBER, 2015
29

NERC151637 T

Geo-Spatial Technologies for Planning and
Management of MGNREGS

7-11 Sep

SIRD
Kohima
Nagaland

N.S.R. Prasad
K. Haloi

25

0

0

0

7

0

0

0

32

4

92

30

NERC151631 T

Management Development Programme

7-11 Sept.

SIRD
Mizoram

R.M. Pant
M.K. Shrivastava

19

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

23

9

88

31

NERC151640 T

Low Cost Housing Technologies under IAY

14-18 Sep

NERC

A. Simhachalam
N.S.R. Prasad

33

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

33

3

90

Total

77

0

0

0

11

0

0

0

88

16

270

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

OCTOBER, 2015
32

NERC151646 T

Application of Geo-Spatial Technologies
for Resource Mapping in RD programmes

12-16 Oct

NERC

A. Simhachalam
K. Haloi

39

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

39

2

92

33

NERC151630 T

Social Audit in MGNREGS

Oct. 26-30

SIRD
Kohima
Nagaland

M.K. Shrivastava
and Team

51

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

51

23

90

34

NERC151644 T

Research Methodology

26-30 oct.

NERC

K. Haloi
A. Simhachalam

0

0

0

0

2

10

0

0

12

9

88

35

NERC151647 T

Maintenance of Accounts under IWMP

26 Oct-7 Nov

NERC

B.N. Sarma
K. Haloi

26

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

26

4

82

Total

116

0

0

0

2

10

0

0

128

38

352

175

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)

176

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

NOVEMBER, 2015
36

NERC151645 T

Smart Schools through ICT Tools under SAGY

2-6 Nov.

NERC

S.K. Ghosh

7

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

7

0

76

37

NERC151648 T

Strategies for Promotion of Rural
Micro-Enterprise

2-6 Nov

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

17

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

22

8

88

38

NERC151649 T

Geo-Spatial Technologies for Planning
and Management of MGNREGS

2-6 Nov

NERC

K. Haloi
N.S.R. Prasad

31

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

31

1

86

39

NERC151650 T

Geo-Spatial Technologies for Planning
and Management of Rural Roads

16-20 Nov. 16

SIRD, Manipur

A. Simachalam
N.S.R. Prasad

21

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

24

4

90

40

NERC151643 T

Profitable Poultry Farming and Management
(Govt. of Meghalaya)

16-21 Nov.

NERC

K.K. Bhattacharjee

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

22

24

13

86

41

NERC151656 T

Financial Management for RD Programmes

30 Nov.- 4 Dec

NERC

B.N. Sarma
R.M. Pant

37

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

38

10

80

115

0

0

6

3

0

0

22

146

36

506

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

DECEMBER, 2015
42

NERC151651 S

Promotion of Rural Micro-enterprises:
Prospects and Challenges

7-8, Dec

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

5

0

0

0

63

0

0

0

68

15

NA

43

NERC151638 T

Integrated District Planning through
Panchayati Raj Institutions

December 14-18,
2016

NERC

M.K. Shrivastava

6

0

7

0

0

0

0

0

13

3

86

44

NERC151655 T

Floriculture Development Techniques
(Govt. of Meghalaya)

December 14-19,
2016

NERC

K.K. Bhattacharjee

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

28

30

28

92

45

NERC151627 T

Behavioural Skills for Development
Professionals

December 21-23,
2016

NERC

R.M. Pant
Ratna Bhuyan

2

0

6

0

0

16

0

0

24

10

82

15

0

13

0

63

16

0

28

135

56

177

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)

178

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

7

92

JANUARY, 2016
46

NERC151642 T

Integrated District Planning through PRIs

Jan 5-9

NERC

M.K. Shrivastava

9

0

10

1

0

0

0

0

20

47

NERC151658 S

Geoinformatics Applications in
Rural Development

7-8 Jan

NERC

K. Haloi
N.S.R. Prasad
A. Simhachalam

10

0

0

0

4

50

0

2

66

48

NERC151659 T

Profitable Pig Farming and Meat Processing
(Govt. of Meghalaya)

4-9 Jan

NERC

K.K. Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

15

16

8

90

49

NERC151660 S

Indigenous Knowledge System for
Sustainable Rural Development

18-19 Jan

NERC

R.M. Pant
M.K. Shrivastava

5

0

0

0

5

38

0

0

48

23

NA

50

NERC151654 T

Social Audit in MGNREGS

19-23 Jan

NERC

M.K. Shrivastava

18

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

22

7

78

51

NERC151663 T

Rural Entrepreneurship Development
Programmes

27-29 Jan

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

8

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

12

7

82

51

0

10

9

9

88

0

17

184

52

NA

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

(Contd...)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

FEBRUARY, 2016
52

NERC151666 T

ICT Applications in Office Automation for RD

8-12 Feb

NERC

S.K. Ghosh

19

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

19

4

92

53

NERC151668 T

Profitable Poultry Farming and Management

15-20 Feb

NERC

K.K. Bhattacharjee

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

29

30

9

92

54

NERC151634 T

Application of Geo-Spatial Technologies for
Resource and Social Mapping under SAGY

Feb 22-26, 2016

NERC

A. Simhachalam
N.S.R. Prasad

12

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

14

5

88

55

NERC15167 T

Integrated District Planning for Sixth
Schedule Districts/Area

Feb 22-26

NERC

M.K. Shrivastava
and Team

15

0

3

0

0

0

0

3

21

6

92

56

NERC151671 S

Make in India' and Rural North-East:
The Challenges

25-26 Feb

NERC

Ratna Bhuyan

11

3

0

0

6

96

0

0

116

42

NA

57

NERC151672 W

Land Policy for Poverty Alleviation :
Status and Way Forward

29 Feb. 2 March

NERC

M.K. Shrivastava
and Team

9

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

11

1

NA

67

3

5

2

6

96

0

32

211

67

364

179

(Contd...)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)

180

ANNEXURE - III (Contd...)
1MARCH, 2016

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

58

NERC151670 T

Geo-Spatial Technologies for Planning
and Management of NRDWP

7-11 March, 2016

NERC

A. Simhachalam
N.S.R. Prasad

16

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

18

1

90

59

Additional

Workshop on “Initiatives Towards Building 11-12 March, 2016
Model Village In North-East India”

NERC

M.K. Shrivastava

1

0

0

1

4

15

0

0

21

11

NA

60

Additional

2nd SIRD-NIRDPR, Ghy Conclave

14-15 March, 2016

SIRD,
Sikkim

R.M. Pant
R.P. Achari

4

0

0

0

14

0

0

0

18

4

NA

61

NERC151652 T

ICT Applications for Development and
14-18 March, 2016
Dissemination of IEC Materials for Swachh
Bharat Abhiyan and SAGY

NERC

S.K. Ghosh

21

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

21

5

94

62

NERC151674 T

Geo-Spatial Technologies for Planning
and Management of NRDWP

14-18 March, 2016

SIRD,
Nagaland

K. Haloi
A. Simhachalam

24

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

24

8

92

63

NERC151675 S

Natural Resource Management:
Technological Issues and Options

18-19 March, 2016

NERC

M.K. Shrivastava

0

0

0

0

0

42

0

1

43

16

NA

66

0

0

3

18

57

0

1

145

45

276

1138

3

47

29

122

286

0

Grand Total

268 1893

593 1768

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R1

Research Studies Taken up During 2015-16
S. No.

Title

Team

A. NIRD & PR Research Studies
1.

Status of Devolution of Functions, Functionaries and Finances
for Rural Local Bodies in Select States: Jammu & Kashmir,
Jharkhand & Odisha

Dr. Y. Bhaskar Rao

2.

Democratic Decentralisation and Tribal Self-Governance:
A Study of Implementation of PESA Act in Two States

Dr. Pratyusna Patnaik

3.

Assessment of Work Load and Human Resource in Gram
Panchayats

Dr. Jayalakshmi

4.

Distributional Equity of Rural Drinking Water: A Study on
Inclusive Service Delivery

Dr. P. SivaRam
Dr. R. Ramesh

5.

Livelihood Promotion Through Community Based Organisations: Dr. N.V. Madhuri
A Study Across Six States
Dr. Shankar Chatterjee
Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar

6.

Participatory Irrigation Management Through Water User
Associations: an Assessment of Some Selected Irrigated
Command Areas

Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar
Dr. Siddayya
Dr. K. Prabhakar

7.

Study of the Impact of the Climate Change on the Natural
Resources and Rural Livelihoods to Develop Spatial Decision
Support System (SDSS) Using Geo-informatics Technology

Dr. P. Kesava Rao,
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

(Contd...)

181

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R1 (Contd...)
S. No.

Title

Team

8.

Participatory Decentralised Planning and Inclusive Development Dr. R. Chinnadurai
of Marginalised Sections – An Analysis of Selected Better
Dr. R. Aruna Jayamani
Performing GPs

9.

Generation of Sustainable Village Resources Development
Plans Using Participatory GIS Approach (Based on Saansad
Adarsh Gram Yojana (SGSY) Scheme)

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi

B. Case Studies
10.

Case Study on Best Practices in Rural Development: A Case
Study of PUNSARI Gram Panchayat in Gujarat

Dr. P. SivaRam
Dr. R. Ramesh

11.

Singhana Gram Panchayat as an Effective Panchayati Raj
Institution of Singhana Village Community

Dr. Ajit Kumar

12.

Livelihood Strategies among the Mankirdia PVTG of Odisha

Dr. T.G. Ramaiah

13.

Participatory Decentralised Planning Towards Achieving
ISO Certification – A Case Study of Papparambakkam Gram
Panchayat, Tiruvallur District, TN

Dr. R. Aruna Jayamani

14.

Solid Waste Management in Rural Areas

Dr. R. Ramesh
Dr. P. SivaRam

15.

Case Study on Integration and Functioning of Traditional
Institutions of Local Self-Government under Panchayati Raj
System: A Case –Lachen and Lachung Villages in Sikkim

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. M.K. Shrivastava
NERC

16.

A Case Study of District Planning under Autonomous District
Councils (ADCs)

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. M.K. Shrivastava
NERC
(Contd...)

182

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R1 (Contd...)
S. No.

Title

Team

17.

Case Study on Process Documentation of Social Audit of
Integrated Watershed Management Programme

Dr. K. Prabhakar
Dr. Siddayya
Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar

18.

A Case Study of Successful Livelihood Interventions
among Chenchus

Dr. N.V. Madhuri

19.

A Case Study on Livelihoods Initiatives and Standard of Living
of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups in Madhya Pradesh

Dr. R. Murugesan
CSERE

20.

Case Study on Evaluating Implementation of “Jan Dhan Yojana”

Dr. B.K. Swain
CRCDB

21.

Case Study on “Effective Panchayati Raj Institutions” –
In Gaya – Boudh Gaya – Turi Khurd Village

Shri R. Suryanarayana
Reddy, Consultant, CPR

C. SIRD / Collaborative Research Studies
22.

Impact of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) on Rural People of Tripura

SIPARD, Tripura

23.

Action Research Project on Village Disaster Risk Management
Plan (VDRMP) at Rasapettai Village in Cuddalore District of
Tamil Nadu

SIRD, Tamil Nadu and
C-GARD Faculty

24.

Post-Disaster Recovery: Assessment of Needs in Moderate Flood Dr. K. Suman Chandra
Conditions” in Collaboration with Rahara Abhikshan, Kolkata
P & H (CAS&DM)

183

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R2

Research Studies Completed During 2015-16
S. No.

Title

Team

A. NIRD&PR Research Projects / Studies
1.

Coping Strategies and Risk Bearing Capacities of Small and
Marginal Farmers in Rain-fed Agriculture

Dr. V. Suresh Babu

2.

Impact Assessment of Community Radio on Social Development
of Rural People: A Comparative Study

Dr. K.P. Kumaran
Dr. Anil Takalkar
Dr. T. Rama Devi

3.

Good Practices and Interventions Followed by the Gram
Panchayats for Effective Delivery of Services in Select States:
A Comparative Study

Dr. Y. Bhaskar Rao

4.

A Research Study on Crisis in Small and Marginal Farming:
Dr. K. Suman Chandra
A Study of Agrarian Relations, Public Policy and Subsistence
Mr. R.V. Ramanamurthy
Strategies in Andhra Pradesh (Conditions of Small Farm House
University of Hyderabad
Holds & Agrarian Changes in AP & Telangana: A Micro Level Study)

5.

Efficiency of School Development and Monitoring
Committees in Achieving Goals of Universalisation of School
Education: A Study in Karnataka

Dr. M. Sarumathy

6.

Efficiency, Effectiveness and Impact of Community Based
Monitoring System for Access to Basic Minimum Services:
A Study of Different Models

Dr. R. Chinnadurai and
Team

7.

Management of Health Care Services by Women Headed
CHRD Panchayats

Dr. Sucharita Pujari,

(Contd...)

184

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R2 (Contd...)
S. No.

Title

Team

8.

Nutritional Security and Equity in its Accessibility in
Watershed Programmes

Dr. Ch. Radhika Rani
Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar

9.

Assessment of Workload and Human Resource in Gram
Panchayats

Dr. Jayalakshmi

10.

Singhana Gram Panchayat as an Effective Panchayati Raj
Institution of Singhana Village Community

Dr. Ajit Kumar

11.

Participatory Decentralised Planning Towards Achieving ISO
Certification – A Case Study of Papparambakkam Gram
Panchayat, Tiruvallur District, TN

Dr. R. Aruna Jayamani

12.

Case Study on Integration and Functioning of Traditional
Institutions of Local Self-Government under Panchayati Raj
System: A Case – Lachen and Lachung villages in Sikkim

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. M.K. Shrivastava
NERC

13.

A Case Study of District Planning under Autonomous District
Councils (ADCs)

Dr. R.M. Pant
Dr. M.K. Shrivastava
NERC

14.

Case Study on “Effective Panchayati Raj Institutions” – In
Gaya – Boudh Gaya – TuriKhurd Village

Shri R. Suryanarayana
Reddy, Consultant, CPR

B. SIRD Research Studies
15.

Evaluation of SHG Performance under SGSY : A Case Study of Goa GIRDA, Goa

16.

ISGP Intervention in Gram Panchayats of Cooch Bihar

SIRD,
West Bengal

17.

Study on School Dropouts : Causes and Probable Solutions

SIRD,
Madhya Pradesh

185

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R3

Research Studies On-going During 2015-16
S. No.

Title

Team

A. NIRD&PR Research Projects / Studies
1.

Performance Audit of RSETI/REDP Enterprises in Rajasthan and
Chhattisgarh

Dr. T.G. Ramaiah

2.

Nature and Extent of Tenancy Arrangements in Godavari and
Kaveri Delta Zones: A Comparative Study

Dr. K. Suman Chandra
and Team

3.

ITKS in CSBs; Coping Mechanisms to Address Crop Failure

Dr. G. Valentina
Dr. V. Suresh Babu

4.

Study on Indebtedness among IAY Beneficiary HouseholdsA Study in Selected States

Dr. Y. Gangi Reddy
Dr. P. SivaRam

5.

Status of Fiscal Devolution and Decentralisation of
Resources on Panchayats

K. Siva Subrahmanyam,
Advisor, CPR

6.

Status of Devolution of Functions, Functionaries and
Finances for Rural Local Bodies in Select States: Jammu &
Kashmir, Jharkhand & Odisha

Dr. Y. Bhaskar Rao

7.

Democratic Decentralisation and Tribal Self-Governance:
A Study of Implementation of PESA Act in Two States

Dr. Pratyusna Patnaik

8.

Distributional Equity of Rural Drinking Water: A Study on
Inclusive Service Delivery

Dr. P. SivaRam
Dr. R. Ramesh

9.

Livelihood Promotion Through Community Based
Organisations: A Study Across Six States

Dr. N.V. Madhuri
Dr. Shankar Chatterjee
Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar
(Contd...)

186

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R3 (Contd...)
S. No.

Title

Team

10.

Participatory Irrigation Management Through Water User
Associations: an Assessment of Some Selected Irrigated
Command Areas

Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar
Dr. Siddayya
Dr. K. Prabhakar

11.

Study of the Impact of the Climate Change on the Natural
Resources and Rural Livelihoods to Develop Spatial Decision
Support System (SDSS) Using Geo-informatics Technology

Dr. P. Kesava Rao,
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

12.

Participatory Decentralised Planning and Inclusive
Development of Marginalised Sections – An Analysis of
Selected Better Performing GPs

Dr. R. Chinnadurai
Dr. R. Aruna Jayamani

13.

Generation of Sustainable Village Resources Development
Plans Using Participatory GIS Approach (Based on Saansad
Adarsh Gram Yojana (SGSY) Scheme)

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi

B. Case Studies
14.

Case Study on Best Practices in Rural Development: A Case
Study of PUNSARI Gram Panchayat in Gujarat

Dr. P. SivaRam
Dr. R. Ramesh

15.

Livelihood Strategies among the Mankirdia PVTG of Odisha

Dr. T.G. Ramaiah

16.

Solid Waste Management in Rural Areas

Dr. R. Ramesh
Dr. P. SivaRam

17.

Case Study on Process Documentation of Social Audit of
Integrated Watershed Management Programme

Dr. K. Prabhakar
Dr. Siddayya
Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar
(Contd...)

187

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R3 (Contd...)
S. No.

Title

Team

18.

A Case Study of Successful Livelihood Interventions
Among Chenchus

Dr. N.V. Madhuri

19.

A Case Study on Livelihoods Initiatives and Standard of
Dr. R. Murugesan
Living of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups in Madhya Pradesh CSERE

20.

Case Study on Evaluating Implementation of “Jan Dhan Yojana”

Dr. B. K. Swain
CRCDB

C. SIRD/Collaborative Institution Studies
21.

Post-Disaster Recovery: Assessment of Needs in Moderate Flood Dr. K. Suman Chandra
Conditions” in Collaboration with Rahara Abhikshan, Kolkata
P & H (CAS&DM)

22.

Action Research Project on Village Disaster Risk Management
Plan (VDRMP) at Rasapettai Village in Cuddalore District of
Tamil Nadu

SIRD, Tamil Nadu and
C-GARD faculty

23.

Livelihood Projects/Micro Enterprises Through SHGs

SIRD, Arunachal Pradesh

24.

Awareness Building in IWMP – A Case Study

SIRD, Himachal Pradesh

25.

Study on Factor’s Facilitating Participation of Women in
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA in Himachal Pradesh

SIRD
Himachal Pradesh

26.

Major Livelihood Sources among Chenchus (PTG)- A Case Study
of Mahabubnagar District, Telangana

AMR- APARD
Telangana

27.

Impact Assessment of MGNREGS on Livelihoods of Draught
AMR- APARD
Prone Areas : A Case Study of Mahabubnagar District, Telangana Telangana

(Contd...)

188

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R3 (Contd...)
S. No.

Title

Team

28.

Women Empowerment Through Systematic Formation and
Development of SHG

SIRD
Madhya Pradesh

29.

Action Research Proposal for Formation of Model Village

SIRD
Madhya Pradesh

30.

Impact of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) on Rural People of Tripura

SIPARD
Tripura

189

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R4

Completed Formal Action Research Studies for the Year 2015-16
S. No.

Title

Team

Study Taken Up in 2015-16
1

Development of Model Village as per SAGY

Dr. Gyanmudra and
Dr. M. Sarumathy

Completed Studies
1

Geo-informatics Based Livelihood Planning of Selected Villages
in Maharashtra

Dr. V. Madhava Rao
Dr. R.R. Hermon
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar

2

Participatory Micro level Planning & Management for
Sustainable Development Through GIS Applications

SIRD TN Team and
NIRD&PR Team
Dr. V. Madhava Rao
Dr. R.R. Hermon
Dr P. Kesava Rao
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar

3

Geo-informatics Based Mapping and Monitoring of Rural
Development Programmes with Special Emphasis on
MGNREGS – A Case Study of Wayanad District, Kerala State

Dr. V. Madhava Rao
Dr. R.R. Hermon
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P. Kesava Rao

On-going Studies
1

Action Research: Development of Model Village as per SAGY

Dr. Gyanmudra
Dr. M. Sarumathy

(Contd...)

190

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R4 (Contd...)
S. No.

Title

Team

2

Action Research on Promotion of Rural Entrepreneurship &
Enterprises Through Livelihoods Cluster Approach: A Pilot
Initiative in Action Research - NERC

Dr. Kanak Haloi
Dr. Ratna Bhuyan

3

Enhancement of Forest Based Livelihoods Through
Conservation and Regeneration Strategies in Eastern
Ghats Hinterland

Shri V. Krishna Rao
Kovel Foundation
Dr. M.V. Rao
Dr. G. Rajanikanth

4

Village Adoption - Action Research Mode in Sirkunti and
Mamdapur Villages of Astha Northern Block of Vardha District
by CSV Vardha - Maharashtra

Dr. V. Suresh Babu

5

Village Adoption - Action Research Mode in Tehri District
by HISCO, Dehradun - Uttarakhand

Dr. V. Suresh Babu

6

Village Adoption - Action Research Mode in Coimbatore,
Villapura and Sivaganga Districts of Tamil Nadu by Shri Amm
Chettiar Research Institute - Tamil Nadu

Dr. V. Suresh Babu

7

Action Research Project on “The Forgotten Category Rural Artisans - Transformation into Rural Entrepreneurs"

SEDYAM
Hyderabad

191

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R5

On-going Village Adoption Studies for the Year 2015-16
S. No.

State

District

Village

Faculty Member/
Team

1.

Andhra Pradesh

Mahabubnagar

Appapur

Dr. P. SivaRam
Dr. Y. Gangi Reddy
Md. Khan

2.

Andhra Pradesh

Prakasham

Gangavaram,
Inkollu Mandal

Dr. Ravi Babu

3.

Andhra Pradesh

Mahabubnagar

Hajipally

Dr. P. SivaRam
Dr. Y. Gangi Reddy
Non-Academic Staff

4.

Andhra Pradesh

Prakasham

Mohiuddinpuram

Dr. N. Kalpalatha
Dr. Padmaja
Ms. Zareena

5.

Andhra Pradesh

Chittoor

Paalagattupalli

Dr. Raj Kumar .P
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar

6.

Assam

Moregaon

Hatiutha

Dr. K. Haloi

7.

Assam

Kamprup

Jajikona

Dr. K. Haloi
Dr. K. Mukesh
Mr. Kumar Srivastava

8.

Assam

Nalbari

Kathora

Dr. K. Haloi
Mr. A. Simhachalam

9.

Chhattisgarh

Dhamtari

Sonjhari

Dr. V. Annamalai

(Contd...)

192

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R5 (Contd...)
S. No.

State

District

Village

Faculty Member/
Team

10.

Chhattisgarh

Bastar

Tirathgarh

Dr. S.N. Rao

11.

Chhattisgarh

Dhamtari

Tumrabahar

Dr. T.G. Ramaiah

12.

Karnataka

Chamarajanagar

Hosapodu
Hiriiyambala
Kathakalpadu
Havinamula

Dr. V. Suresh Babu

13.

Karnataka

Gulbarga

Vantichinta

Dr. K. Jayalakshmi
Dr. G. Valentina

14.

Karnataka

Bidar

Vittalpura

Dr. Ch. Radhika Rani

15.

Karnataka

Yadgir

Belgera

Dr. Siddayya
Dr. K. Prabhakar

16.

Madhya Pradesh

Dhar

Moosapura
Kofisondpur

Dr. N.V. Madhuri
Dr. C. Dheeraja
Shri. K. P. Rao

17.

Madhya Pradesh

Chhattarpur

Patori

Dr. R.K. Srivastava

18.

Maharashtra

Chandrapur

Ashapur

Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar

19.

Maharashtra

Chandrapur

Kotban

Shri. D.S.R. Murthy

20.

Maharashtra

Chandrapur

Pimpalkoutha

Shri G.V. Satya Narayana

(Contd...)

193

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R5 (Contd...)
S. No.

194

State

District

Village

Faculty Member/
Team

21.

Maharashtra

Nanded

Somarla

Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Dr. R. Chinnadurai

22.

Maharashtra

Ahmednagar

Karegon Village

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Shri D.S.R. Murthy

23.

Odisha

Koraput

Khudi

Dr. Y. Bhaskar Rao

24.

Odisha

Koraput

Mandikuta

Dr. B.K. Swain

25.

Odisha

Sundargarh

Sasa

Dr. G.V.K. Lohidas
Dr. A. Debapriya

26.

Odisha

Cuttack

Naraz

Dr. Debapriya

27.

Rajasthan

Udaipur

Amarpura

Dr. K. Prabhakar

28.

Rajasthan

Bharatpur

Hantra
Revenue Village

Shri H.K. Solnaki
Dr. P. Kesava Rao

29.

Tamil Nadu

Cuddalore

Sirumangalam

Dr. R. Murugesan

30.

Tamil Nadu

Dindigul

Manaloor

Dr Ramesh

31.

Tamil Nadu

Villipuram

Saram,
Kilmavilangai

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar

32.

Telangana

Warangal

Kottapalli

Dr. P. Anuradha

33.

West Bengal

Bankura

Seulibona

Dr. Shankar Chatterjee

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R6

List of Consultancy Studies Taken up During 2015-16
S. No.

Study Title

Team Members

1

Agrarian Distress, Coping Mechanisms and Ramifications of
Debt Waiver Scheme

Dr. Ch. Radhika Rani
Dr. Siddayya
Dr. K. Prabhakar

2

Study on the Socio-economic Reasons for Migration and
Impact of Government Programmes on Migrant Families in
Bolangir District, Odisha

Dr. G. Rajanikanth
Dr. C. Dheeraja
Dr. V. Suresh Babu
Dr. Pratyusna Patnaik

3

Validation of APIB Dehradun Database Project

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

4

District Rural Roads Plan on GIS Platform for PMGSY-II in
Five Districts of Kerala

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

5

Training Extension and Support for Online Watershed Estimation, Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
E-DPR and Geo-Hydrogeology Model Preparation under
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Watershed Component of PMKSY
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

(Contd...)

195

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R6 (Contd...)
S. No.

196

Study Title

Team Members

6

Application of Space Technology in Rural Roads Project
under PMGSY

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

7

Evaluation Study of Bijju KBK Plan

Dr. A. Debapriya
Shri T. Phanidra Kumar
Dr. S.P. Ray
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R7

List of Ongoing Consultancy Studies During 2015-16
S. No.

Study Title

Team Members

1.

Promoting Women ‘s Political Leadership & Gender
Responsive in India

Dr. C.S Singhal and
others

2.

Agro-climate Planning and Information Bank (APIB) Project for
Champawat and Dehradun District of Uttarakhand Deployment of SDSS in Two Districts

Dr. V. MadhavaRao
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. R.R. Hermon
Dr. P. Keasava Rao
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Shri H.K. Solanki

3.

Setting up of Geoinformatic Centres for RD in
5 African Countries

Dr. V. Madhava Rao
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R Murthy

4.

Establishment of CGARD Centres at SIRD, TN & Kerala

Dr. V. Madhava Rao
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Shri D.S.R. Murthy

5.

Adoption of Low Performance Districts under MGNREGA in the
States of Uttar Pradesh (Bundelkhand region), Assam,
Karnataka (Hyderabad-Karnataka Region) and Rajasthan

Dr. G. Rajani Kanth
and Team
CWEPA

6.

Evaluation Study of Foreclosed Watershed Projects under
IWDP, DPAP and DPAP

Dr. Siddayya
Dr. U. Hemantha Kumar
Dr. K. Prabhakar
Dr. Ch. Radhika Rani
Dr. Vijayachandra Reddy S.
(Contd...)

197

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R7 (Contd...)
S. No.

Study Title

Team Members

7.

Socio-economic impact of MGNREGS-Longitudinal
Study in Six States

Dr. V. Suresh Babu
Dr. S.V. Rangacharyulu

8.

Impact of MNREGA on Distress Migration in the Vulnerable
communities- A Cohort Mid-Term Repeated Measures
Study in 4 States

Dr. Pratyusna Patnaik
Dr. G. Rajanikanth
Dr. V. Suresh Babu
(Nodal Officer)

9.

Nutrition and Education Status of Children Between 4-7 Years
Dr. Lakhan Singh
from Women Headed Households under MGNREGA and Women Dr. G. Rajanikanth
Headed Households not under MGNREGA: A Comparative Study Dr. V. Suresh Babu
(Nodal Officer)

10.

Study on the Socio-economic Reasons for Migration and
Impact of Government Programmes on Migrant Families
in Bolangir District, Odisha

Dr. G. Rajanikanth
Dr. C. Dheeraja
Dr. V. Suresh Babu
Dr. PratyusnaPatnaik

11.

Validation of APIB Dehradun data base Project

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

12.

District Rural Roads Plan on GIS Platform for PMGSY-II in
Five Districts of Kerala

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V. Madhava Rao
(Contd...)

198

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R7 (Contd...)
S. No.

Study Title

Team Members

13.

Training Extension and Support for Online Watershed
Estimation, E-DPR and Geo-Hydrogeology Model Preparation
under Watershed Component of PMKSY

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

14.

Application of Space Technology in Rural Roads Project
under PMGSY

Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P. Kesava Rao
Shri H.K. Solanki
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Dr. Raj Kumar Pammi
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

15.

Evaluation Study of Bijju KBK Plan

Dr. A. Debapriya
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. S.P. Ray
Dr. V. Madhava Rao

199

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R8

List of Consultancy Studies Completed During 2015-16
S. No.

Study Title

Team Members

1.

Development of a Set of Alternative ICT Models Based on a
Study and Analysis of the Major ICT Initiatives in Agriculture
in India to Meet the Information Need of the Indian Farmers

Dr. V. Madhava Rao
Dr. R.R. Hermon
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. P. Keasava Rao
Shri D.S.R. Murthy

2.

Spatial Decision Support System (SDSS) for Rural Development
(for Balanced 14 States and Upgradation of Customised
Planning and Estimates Software for 11 States with Local
Language Interface)

Dr. V. Madhava Rao
Shri T. Phanindra Kumar
Dr. R.R. Hermon
Dr. P. Keasava Rao
Shri D.S.R. Murthy
Shri H.K. Solanki

3.

Monitoring of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan in Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar, CESD

4.

Monitoring of Mid-Day Meal scheme in Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar, CESD

5.

Monitoring of Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA)
in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana State

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar
Dr. R.R. Prasad
CESD

6.

Post-Enumeration Survey of U-DISE-2014 (5% Sample Check)
SSA, in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar
Dr. N. Deepa

7.

Preparation of Model Gram Panchayat – Tribal Sub-plan

Dr. R.R. Prasad, CESD

(Contd...)

200

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R8 (Contd...)
S. No.

Study Title

Team Members

8.

Evaluation of Socio-economic Conditions of Devadasis
Belonging to SCs in the State of AP, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu and Telangana

Dr. R. Chinnadurai, CPME

9.

Evaluation Studies of NSKFDC Schemes in the States of
Karnataka

Dr. R.R. Prasad
and Team, CESD

10.

A Study of Productivity of Works Completed During the Years
2010-2014 and Their Sustainability for the CommunityAnalysing Through Triangulation in All States – Assets Study

Dr. K. Prabhakar
Dr. G. RajaniKanth
Dr. V. Suresh Babu
(Nodal Officer)

11.

Process Documentation of IPPE Including the Assessment
of Training and Capacity Building for IPPE

Dr. Aruna Jayamani
Dr. G. Rajanikanth
Dr. V. Suresh Babu
(Nodal Officer)

12.

Short and Long Term Impact of the Planning Process (IPPE)
on Selected Variables – Type of Work and Plans, Participation
of SC/ST/Women, Changes in the Complaints Data and Capacity
of the PRI in 7 States

Dr. C. Dheeraja
Dr. G. Rajanikanth
Dr. V. Suresh Babu
(Nodal Officer)

13.

Post-Enumeration Survey (5% Sample Check) of U-DISE 2014
in 4 districts of Andhra Pradesh & Telangana

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar

14.

Agrarian Distress, Coping Mechanisms and Ramifications of
Debt Waiver Scheme

Dr. Ch. Radhika Rani
Dr. Siddayya
Dr. K. Prabhakar

201

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

ANNEXURE-R9

Faculty Publications
The following are the details of papers and publications of faculty members :

CENTRE FOR AGRARIAN STUDIES (CAS)
Dr. K. Suman Chandra, Professor & Head
1.

Report on National Consultation on “Policy Perspectives and State Response to Agrarian Crisis
and Farmers’ Distress”, Published by NIRD&PR, December, 2015 (ISBN 978 93 84503 50 5)

2.

Integrated Land Use Planning for Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development, Apple
Academic Press, USA, February, 2016 (ISBN 978 1 77188 104 3)

3.

“Sustainable Agriculture – Challenges and Prospects”, Published by NIRD&PR, March 2016 (ISBN
978 93 84503 53 6)

4.

K. Suman Chandra, E.V. Prakash Rao (2016) “Agrarian Distress and Farmers’ Suicides”, Agrarian
Distress in India-Causes and Remedies, Edited by T. Haque; Concept Publishing Company Private
Ltd; New Delhi (ISBN-13:978-93-5125-257-3)

Dr. Ch. Radhika Rani, Associate Professor

202

1.

A.Amarender Reddy, Ch.Radhika Rani, Timothy Cadman, Soora Naresh Kumar and Anugula N
Reddy (2016 ), “Towards Sustainable Indicators of Food and Nutritional Outcomes in India”,
World Journal of Science, Technology and Sustainable Development , Vol. 13, Issue 2 pp 128142 (ISSN:2042 – 5945)

2.

Ch. Radhika Rani, Siddayya, Prabhakar V (2016), “Risk, Vulnerability and Coping Mechanisms A Study in Telangana”, Indian Journal of Economics and Development, Vol. 12, No. 1a, P : 291299. (ISSN: 2277 – 5412)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CENTRE FOR NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (CNRM)
Dr. Siddayya, (Associate Professor)
1.

Siddayya and Mahantesh, "Pesticide Usage and IPM in Vegetable Production in Western Uttar
Pradesh: Environmental Impact Assessment", International Journal of Tropical Agriculture,
Vol.33, No.2, April-June, 2015, Serial Publications, New Delhi (ISSN: 0254 – 8755)

2.

Thasnimol, H. Lokesha, M. R. Kammar, Amrutha T Joshi and Siddayya, “Dietary Pattern of Children
in North Eastern Karnataka with Reference to High Value Agriculture Commodities”, International
Journal of Food and Nutritional Sciences, Vol.4, Iss.3, Apr-Jun, 2015. IJFANS Publisher (e-ISSN
2320 – 7876)

3.

Amrutha T Joshi, Siddayya and S. Vijayachandra Reddy, "A Comparative Study on Use of Electronic
Devices in Agricultural Marketing in NEK Region. Indian Journal of Agricultural Marketing,
29(1)2015, ISSN 0971 – 8664, IJAM, PJTSAU, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad - 500 030

4.

Siddayya, S.Vijayachandra Reddy, Shivanand K. Kammar and Chidanand Patil, “An Economic
Analysis On Warehouse Receipts in Hyderabad-Karnataka Region: A Protective Measure Against
Distress Sale of Agriculture Produce”, Indian Journal of Economics and Development, Vol. 12,
No. 1a: 185-190, April 2016. (ISSN 2277 – 5412, Online 2322 – 0430, PAU. Ludhiana

5.

Siddayya, S. Vijayachandra Reddy and Shivaswamy G.P. “Study on Agriculture Credit: Utilisation
Pattern and Diversion in Drought Prone Areas of Hyderabad –Karnataka Region, Indian Journal
of Economics and Development, Vol. 12, No. ( 1): 185-1 90, January-March, 2016. (ISSN 2277 –
5412 Online ISSN 2322 – 0430), PAU, Ludhiana

CENTRE FOR PLANNING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION (CPME)
Dr. R. Chinnadurai, Associate Professor (CPME)
1.

Impact of Social Audit on the Performance of MGNREGS: A Case Study in Tamil Nadu – KILA
Journal of Local Governance, (ISSN 2319 – 930X, 2015)

2.

Effective Leadership and People's Participation Towards Achieving All Round Development - A
Case of Odanthurai Gram Panchayat in Tamil Nadu - International Journal of Scientific Research
(ISSN No. 2277 – 8179, 2015)

203

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CENTRE FOR HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Dr. Gyanmudra, Professor & Head

204

1.

Research Methods for Rural Development Professionals, National Institute of Rural Development
and Panchayati Raj Publications, Hyderabad (ISBN: 978-93-84503-1), March 2015

2.

Sankalan – Initiative in SAGY Gram Panchayat (English), Dept. of Rural Development, Ministry of
Rural Development, Government of India, New Delhi and National Institute of Rural Development
and Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad (978-93-84503-11-6), September 2015

3.

Sankalan – Initiative in SAGY Gram Panchayat (Hindi), Dept. of Rural Development, Ministry of
Rural Development, Government of India, New Delhi and National Institute of Rural Development
and Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad (978-93-84503-12-3), September 2015

4.

Good Practices in Rural Development Sector, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of
India, New Delhi and National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad
(978-93-84503-13-0), September 2015

5.

Samanvay, A Compilation of Central Sector, Centrally Sponsored & State Schemes for Convergence
under Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (English), Dept. of Rural Development, Ministry of Rural
Development, Government of India, New Delhi and National Institute of Rural Development
and Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad, 2015 (29 States and 5 Union Territories)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Samanvay State

ISBN

1

ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS

978-93-84503-14-7

2

ANDHRA PRADESH

978-93-84503-15-4

3

ARUNACHAL PRADESH

978-93-84503-16-1

4

ASSAM

978-93-84503-17-8

5

BIHAR

978-93-84503-18-5

6

CHANDIGARH

978-93-84503-19-2

7

CHHATTISGARH

978-93-84503-20-8

8

DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI

978-93-84503-21-5

9

DAMAN AND DIU

978-93-84503-22-2

10

DELHI

978-93-84503-23-9

11

GOA

978-93-84503-24-6

12

GUJARAT

978-93-84503-25-3

13

HARYANA

978-93-84503-26-0

14

HIMACHAL PRADESH

978-93-84503-27-7

15

JAMMU AND KASHMIR

978-93-84503-28-4

16

JHARKHAND

978-93-84503-29-1

17

KARNATAKA

978-93-84503-30-7

18

KERALA

978-93-84503-31-4

19

LAKSHADWEEP

978-93-84503-32-1

20

MADHYA PRADESH

978-93-84503-33-8

21

MAHARASHTRA

978-93-84503-34-5

22

MANIPUR

978-93-84503-35-2
(Contd...)

205

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

S. No.

Samanvay State

ISBN

23

MEGHALAYA

978-93-84503-36-9

24

MIZORAM

978-93-84503-37-6

25

NAGALAND

978-93-84503-38-3

26

ODISHA

978-93-84503-39-0

27

PUDUCHERRY

978-93-84503-40-6

28

PUNJAB

978-93-84503-41-3

29

RAJASTHAN

978-93-84503-42-0

30

SIKKIM

978-93-84503-43-7

31

TAMIL NADU

978-93-84503-44-4

32

TELANGANA

978-93-84503-45-1

33

TRIPURA

978-93-84503-46-8

34

UTTAR PRADESH

978-93-84503-47-5

35

UTTARAKHAND

978-93-84503-48-2

Dr. T. Vijaya Kumar, Associate Professor

206

1.

Tribal Health Initiative- A Case Study on Mobile Health Unit In Odisha: Mobile Health, Tele
medicine(E-health infrastructure),and Health Communication Chapter in Book Titled Health
and Development-Issues and Challenges Edited by Khan, Paneer, Ramachandran Publishers,
Bloomsbury Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi, March, 2016 (ISBN No.978-93-85936-21-0)

2.

Effectiveness of Early Childhood Education Intervention in Government Primary Schools of
Hyderabad City: A Case Study Paper Published in Desh Vikas Journal, Volume:2, Issue,4, JanuaryMarch 2016 (ISSN No 2394-1782)

3.

Organising the Poor Women Through Self-Help Groups for Empowerment: A Case Study Paper
Published in Desh Vikas Journal, Volume:2, Issue,4, January-March 2016 (ISSN No 2394-1782)

4.

Status of Implementation of the Right to Education Act in Southern States of India: A comparative
Analysis Paper Published in Indian Journal of Adult Education, Vol.76, No.4, October-December
2015 (ISSN No. 0019-5006)

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

5.

Mid-day Meal Scheme in Left Wing Extremism Districts of Chhattisgarh, Paper Published in
Desh Vikas Journal, Volume 2, Issue,3, October – December 2015 (ISSN No. 2394-1782)

6.

Education for Children with Special Needs (CWSN) Challenges and Opportunities, Paper
Published in Desh Vikas Journal, Special Issue on Education in India. Vol.2, Issue 2(2), JulySeptember 2015 (ISSN 2394-1782)

7.

Education of Out of School Children: A Case Study of Special Residential Training Centres under
SSA in Chhattisgarh, Paper Published in Desh Vikas Journal, Special Issue on Education in India.
Vol.2, Issue 2(2), July- September 2015 (ISSN 2394-1782)

8.

Corporate Responsibility in Education: A Case Study of Hetero Group, Paper Published in
Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Humanities, Sociology and Management,
Penang, Malaysia, September 2015 (ISBN 978-93-84422-39-4)

CENTRE FOR GEOINFORMATICS APPLICATION IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT (C-GARD)
(SCHOOL OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & KNOWLEDGE SYSTEM)
Geo-informatics Applications in Natural Resource Management, Professional Books Publisher, Hyderabad
(ISBN:978-93-85506-06-2) by Dr. P Kesava Rao, Dr. V Madhava Rao, T Phanindra Kumar, H K Solanki, DSR
Murthy, Dr.P Raj Kumar, Shri K Rajeshwar.
Dr. P. Kesava Rao, Associate Professor
1.

Geohydrology Modeling for Watershed Planning, 2015, PP19-27, Best Practices under Integrated
Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) in India.

2.

Generation of Sustainable Land Use Plans Using Geo-informatics Technology, 2015, PP 141161; (ISBN:13-978-1-77188 - 198-2)

3.

Site Suitability Analysis for Water Harvesting Structures in Watershed Using Geoinformatics,
2015, PP 131-140, (ISBN : 13-978-1-77188 - 198-2)

4.

Knowledge Management Initiatives Through Agriculture Sector Through Agro Climatic Plannig
and Information Bank for Land Resources Development, 2015, PP105-120 ( ISBN:13-978-1-77188
- 198-2)

5.

Geoinformatics for Studying the Temporal Changes in Land Use/ Land Cover- A Case Study of
Sindhuvallipura Watershed, Nanjangud Taluk, Mysore District, Karnataka, 2015, PP. 163-176
(ISBN:13-978-1-77188 - 198-2)

6.

Generation of GIS Based Watershed Development Plans, 2016, PP. 31-50 (ISBN:978-93-8550606-2)

207

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

7.

Watershed Modeling for Catchment Area of Jurala Project, Using ARCSWAT and Geoinformatics,
2016, PP258-267 (ISBN:978-93-85506-06-2)

8.

Estimation of Soil Erosion in Rushikulya River Basin Using Geoinformatics, 2016,PP473-488
(ISBN:978-93-85506-06-2)

9.

Ground Water Configuration in Upper Catchment of Megadrigedda Reservoir, Visakhapatnam
District, Andhra Pradesh, 2016, PP.561-573 (ISBN:978-93-85506-06-2)

10.

GIS Tools for Disaster Management- A Rural Perspective, 2016, PP.689-696 (ISBN:978-93-8550606-2)

11.

Geoinformatics Based Panchayat Resources Development Plan, 2016, PP.794-808 (ISBN:97893-85506-06-2)

12.

Land Base and Utility Network Mapping Using Geoinformatics Technology – A Case of
Rajendranagar Feeder, R R District, Hyderabad, 2016, PP. 836-848 (ISBN:978-93-85506-06-2)

13.

GIS Based Web Application for Drinking Water Supply Scheme Using Open Source Software- A
Case Study of Rajam Nagar Panchayat, Rajam Mandal, Srikakulam District, AP, 2016, PP. 932943 (ISBN:978-93-85506-06-2)

Shri H.K. Solanki, Assistant Professor
1.

Paper in Edited Book “Geo-Informatics Applications in Natural Resources Management”, (ISBN
: 978-93-85506-06-2), Paper Titled “Free and Open Source ‘OsmAnd’ Mobile Mapping and
Navigation App- an Alternative to Handheld GPS”

Edited Book
1.

Edited Book “Geo-Informatics Applications in Natural Resources Management”, ISBN-978-9385506-06-2, Editors Dr. P. Kesava Rao, T Phanindra Kumar, DSR Murthy, H K Solanki, Dr. P.
Rajkumar, K. Rajeshwar

CENTRE FOR PANCHAYATI RAJ
Dr. Pratyusna Patnaik, Assistant Professor
BOOK CHAPTERS: Does Political Representation Ensure Empowerment? Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats
of Odisha” in Y. S. Sisodia and T. K. Dalapati ed. Development and Discontent in Tribal India, Rawat
Publications, Jaipur, 2015. {ISBN: 978-81-316-0731-2}

208

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

CENTRE FOR EQUITY AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Dr. G. Valentina, Associate Professor
1.

Book- Agripreneurship for Employment and Empowerment of Women in Rural Areas - Published
in 2015, GENEXT Publications (ISBN 978 93 8022 260 8)

2.

Management of Solar Energy Technology and Women Empowerment - Published in 2016 by
GENNEXT Publications (ISBN 978 93 8022 278 3

CENTRE FOR PLANNING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION (CPME)
Dr. Shankar Chatterjee, Professor & Head
1.

“Impact of IAY and SGSY/NRLM on Minorities: An Evaluation Study under

2.

Prime Minister’s 15-Point Programme”, (co-author) Published by NIRD& PR, Hyderabad, 2015
(ISBN 978-93- 84503-09-3).

3.

(27) “My Experience about Development in Some Developing Countries” (Individual) published
by Renu Publishers, New Delhi 2016, ISBN No. 978-93-85502-24-8

4.

(28) “Implementation Of Rural Development Programmes In Telangana: Field Based Study”
(Co-author), Published by New Delhi Publishers, New Delhi, 2016 ( ISBN : 978-93-85503-29-0)

Articles/ Chapters in Edited Book Published as mentioned below:
1.

“Marketing of Self-help Group Products: Innovative cases from Maharashtra” Book on
Dimensions of Marketing Ed. By Md. Muqeet khan & Md. Awais, Published by Regal Publications,
New Delhi 2015 (ISBN 978-81-8484-450-4)

2.

“Women Empowerment Through Self-help Groups: Cases Across India”, Book on Women
Empowerment in India: Challenges Ahead” Ed. by DebashisMajumdar (et.al), Naba Ballygunge
Mahavidyalaya, Kolkata 2015 (No ISBN)

3.

“Development of Scheduled Tribe in India: Facts with Field Cases” Book on Contemporary Indian
Society (In the Beginning of 21st Century) Ed. By Vijay Prakash Sharma, Anmol Publications
Private Ltd., and New Delhi 2015 (ISBN: 9788126164790)

4.

“SHGs at “Take-off” Stage for Development of Rural Minorities in India: Field Observations”
(Co-author), Book on Contemporary Indian Society (In the Beginning of 21st Century) Ed. By
Vijay Prakash Sharma, Anmol Publications Private Ltd., and New Delhi 2015 (ISBN:

209

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

9788126164790)

Articles in Journals
International Journals
1.

“An Innovative Project under MGNREGS: Making Fly Ash Brick at Bankura, West Bengal”,
(Individual), International Journal of Multidisciplinary Research & Development, (ISSN Online
2349-4182 & ISSN Print 2349-5979), Feb. 2016, Vol. 3, Issue 2

2.

“Impact of Micro-enterprises –Cases from Rural India”, (Individual), International Journal: South
Asian Journal of Socio-Political Studies (ISSN0972-4613), Vol. XVI, No.2, Kollam, Kerala, JanuaryJune 2016

3.

“A Unique Case of Using Community Property Resource (water) from Bankura District of West
Bengal”, (Individual), International Journal of Multidisciplinary Research and Development,
(ISSN Online 2349-4182 & ISSN Print 2349-5979), May 2016, Vol. 3, Issue 5

National Journals

210

1.

“Relevance of Dr. Ambedkar’s View in Present India” (Individual) Social Welfare, New Delhi
(ISSN : 00378038, May 2015)

2.

“Rabindranath Tagore: Man of Vision and Epoch Maker,” (Individual) Social Welfare, New Delhi
(ISSN : 00378038, June 2015)

3.

“Implementation of Aajeevika/NRLM in Chhattisgarh State”, (Co-author), Indian Economic
Panorama, New Delhi, July 2015

4.

“A Case of Cooperative Handloom from West Bengal”, (Co-author), Indian Economic Panorama,
New Delhi, October, 2015

5.

“Earning Through Handloom Sector and MGNREGS: Case of Aged Persons from West Bengal”,
(Individual) Social Welfare, October, 2015 (ISSN : 0037-8038)

6.

“Impact of Micro-credit among Minorities” (Co-author) Kurukshetra, New Delhi, November
2015 (ISSN : 0021-5660)

7.

“Aajevika: Chhattisgarh KaMamla”, (Aajevika in Chhattisgarh) (Individual) Grameen Vikash

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

Sameeksha, NIRD&PR, Hyderabad, July-Dec 2015 (ISSN : 0972-5881)
Dr. R. Aruna Jayamani, Assistant Professor
1.

An Evaluation Study on Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) in Kanchipuram
District, Tamil Nadu - International Journal Advances in Social Science and Humanities (ISSN :
2347 – 7474: Vol.No.1, 2016)

2.

Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) in Tiruvannamalai District, Tamil Nadu
– A Study - International Journal for Research and Development (ISSN No.2321 – 3434; Vol.3.
No.5, 2016)

3.

Impact of Globalization and Technology on Women Agricultural Labourers in Tamil Nadu : A
Study - Indian Journal of Research (ISSN : 2250 – 1991) Impact Factor, 5.2; Vol. No.5; 2016

4.

Impact of Social Audit on the Performance of MGNREGS - A Study in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka
- As co-author - Kila Journal of Local Governance (ISSN : 2319 – 930x, Vol.2, 2015)

5.

Livelihood Options and Social Stigma of PLWHA in Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra
(ISSN : 231 – 1423, Vol. No.5, No.3, 2016)

CENTRE FOR RURAL INFRASTUCTURE (CRI)
Dr. R. Ramesh, Assistant Professor
1.

R Ramesh Integral Rural Development: A Rural Transformation Experiment by Sri Aurobindo
Society, Puducherry, Auro-Publications & Concept Publishing Company Pvt Ltd. India 2015 (coauthored with Prof. G Palanithurai) (ISBN : 978 93 5125 110 1)

Journal Articles
1.

R Ramesh ‘Occupational Shifts and Social Change in Tamil Nadu : A Study on a Silent Agrarian
Revolution in the Making’, Journal of Rural Development, Hyderabad: NIRD&PR, Vol.34, No.4,
Oct – Dec, 2015 (Co-authored with Prof. G Palanithurai) (ISBN : 0970 3357)

2.

R Ramesh ‘Small-Scale Solid Waste Management System: A Replicable Model from Mudichur,
Tamil Nadu’, Journal of Development Management and Communication, Vol.II, No.3, July –
September, 2015 (ISSN : 2348-7739) (Co-authored with Dr P SivaRam) (ISBN : 2348 – 7739)

3.

P SivaRam, ‘Solid Waste Management System in Kancheepuram District, Tamil Nadu: A Model

211

ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16

for Replication’ National Seminar on Rural Sanitation in India: Achievements, Trends & Challenges
(27 – 29 Jan, 2016) (Co-authored with Dr R Ramesh (ISBN : 2348 – 7739)

CENTRE FOR GOOD GOVERNANCE AND POLICY ANALYSIS
Dr. K. Prabhakar, Assistant Professor
1.

“An Econometric Analysis of Technology Impact on Commercial Crops” – Published by
international publisher LAP LAMBERT Academic Publishing is a Trademark of Omni Scriptum
GmbH & Co. KG, Heinrich-Böcking-Str. 6-8, 66121, Saarbrücken, Germany, ISBN 978-3-659-822858https://goo.gl/NyoIFd

2.

“Analysis of Public Health Care Services For Urban Poor Women: A Case Study of Bruhat
Bengaluru MahanagaraPaleke (BBMP) Bangalore” – Published by International Journal of
Engineering and Management Sciences - I.J.E.M.S., Vol.7, (1) 2016: 66-73 (ISSN : 2229-600)
http://goo.gl/k6KEJM

3.

BENCHMARKING PUBLIC SERVICES IN NORTH –EAST INDIA - Using Citizen Report Cards for
Improving Access to Information and Delivery of Public Schemes in Remote and Backward
Districts of North-East India – Dr. Meena Nair, Dr. K. Prabhakar, Ms. Sukanya Bhaumik and Ms.
Kavitha Srinivasan, Public Affairs Centre, August 2015 goo.gl/nLIq4J

4.

“Accountability in the Karnataka State Police” - Chapter in Edited book “Developing Country
Perspectives on Public Service Delivery by Anjula Gurtoo and Colin Williams” Published by
Springer international -2015 (ISBN : 978-81-322-2159-3) https://goo.gl/k1DQwd

5.

"Inclusive Growth of Elementary Education in Karnataka –Strengths, Weakness and Area of
Concerns for SSA Initiatives in Karnataka", Journal of Governance & Public Policy (ISSN 22310924), Volume 5, No.1, January –June, 2015, pp.11-18

***

212

:wq

