Annual Report

2014-15

BHARAT RURAL LIVELIHOODS FOUNDATION
C-32, IInd Floor, Neeti Bagh, New Delhi
Phone: 011-46061935, Fax: 011-41013385
Website: www.brlf.in
E-mail: info@brlf.in

BHARAT RURAL LIVELIHOODS FOUNDATION

CONTENT
Message from the President
About BRLF
Our Approach
Geographical Focus of BRLF Interventions
Governance
Transparency and Accountability
Fund Mobilization
Projects and Activities
Project Partners

01
03
05
09
11
14
15
16
21

AKRSPI

Aga Khan Rural
Support Program
INDIA

23
Consortium Project

BAIF

Parihit Samaj Sevi Sansthan
(lead partner)

Development Research
Foundation

35

25
SRIJAN

Self-Reliant Initiatives
through Joint Action

33
PRADAN

FES

Professional Assistance
for Development Action

31

Foundation for
Ecological Security

SEWA

27

Social Education for
Women’s Awareness
Odisha

29

SRI field of Kanyaswari / Amrit of Rojhi village
Credits: SRIJAN

AID 360 Software-BRLF Grant Management Tool
Capacity Building Initiative for Cadre of Rural Professionals
BRLF Events
Annexure 1- Registration Certificate
Annexure 2- MoU with MoRD
Annexure 3- Section 12 A
Annexure 4- 80G Certificate
Annexure 5- Financial Summary and Audited Accounts (2014-15)

37
39
40
41
42
48
49
50

Message from the President

A

t a time when there appears to be some signs of stress in the relationship between civil society and
government, BRLF emerges as a unique example of how they can work together in a strong bond of
partnership. The partnership provides a space for civil society action and enables NGOs to make an
impact at scale. At the same time, it provides government the opportunity to benefit from innovations pioneered
by civil society so that the huge amounts it is providing for its flagship programmes are put to best possible use
and make a real impact on elimination of poverty. The tribal regions of central India where BRLF work is
currently focused, are the pockets where backwardness is most concentrated and where governance is also
the weakest. BRLF aims at bridging both the governance and development deficits in this region through the
project it supports.
BRLF was established through a Union Cabinet decision on 3rd September 2013 to set up an independent
society to upscale civil society action in partnership with Government in 10 states of the Central India tribal belt
(Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Andhra
Pradesh and Telengana). The General body of BRLF is well represented by Secretaries of Rural Development,
Panchayati Raj and Tribal Affairs Ministry Govt. of India, with the Joint Secretary Ministry of Rural Development
as point person for BRLF and member of its EC and GB. The Chief Secretaries and Principal Secretaries –
Rural Development of nine states are members of the General Body of BRLF. In addition there are
representations from Corporate Sector, Banking Sector, Philanthropic organizations, PSUs and Academia in
the General body and Executive Committee of BRLF.
To maintain transparency in the selection and sanction of projects, BRLF has invested in an end-to-end
transaction based management information system, AID 360, developed by Tata Consultancy Services. The
system uses the results based framework for the monitoring and evaluation of the projects, thus making it a
powerful tool for MIS and M&E, and ensuring that both BRLF and its partners are able to focus on outputs and
outcomes, track progress and measure them against the resources deployed. This has the potential to
transform work in this sector and can benefit large State and National Government efforts on rural livelihood
and development.
A mandatory part of all BRLF projects is that they must include work on the pioneering schemes introduced by
the Honorable Prime Minister, such as PM's Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, Jan Dhan Yojana, Soil Health Card
Scheme, Jeevan Jyoti Beema Yojana and Suraksha Beema Yojana. All BRLF partner organizations have been
mandated to ensure that the benefits of these social security schemes reach all participant families.
Given the severity of the crisis facing India's water sector, especially related to agriculture and depleting of
ground water, BRLF in partnership with other donors and technical agencies in India is setting up pilots on
Participatory Ground Water Management across different geographies, so that demonstration and experience
can be gained in different hydrogeological settings.
Similarly, BRLF envisages moving all its participant farmers towards Non-Pesticide Management Agriculture
and is bringing in the technical support to facilitate this effort where ever its partners work.

1

Other special areas of focus envisaged by BRLF include value chain development for NTFPs and key crops,
synergizing biodiversity conservation and livelihoods; strengthening PRIs PESA and FRA, building powerful
economic institutions of the poor such as Farmer Producer Organisations; working with Particularly Vulnerable
Tribal Groups, encouraging solar energy and building capacities of tribal rural professionals and small CBOs.
One of BRLF's key mandates is to address the capacity building challenge for existing and aspiring rural
professionals who serve the rural communities whether through government departments, PRIs, NGOs or
CBOs. To guide this process, BRLF has set up a Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri. S. M.
Vijayanand, Secretary Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Government of India. BRLF and Central University Gujarat
(CUG), Gandhinagar have signed an MoU to support a multi-location, multi-topic curriculum for rural
professionals, which will be conducted by partners who have the best expertise and experience for each
module of the course, which will be jointly certified by both the institutions.
It had been envisaged by MoRD and repeatedly suggested by representatives of State Governments that
BRLF enter into a formal agreement to facilitate a synergistic engagement between State governments and
selected CSOs, so as to ensure better coordination, avoid duplication of effort and enable smoother leveraging
of various Schemes and programmes by partner CSOs. BRLF is in an advanced stage of finalizing MoUs with a
number of state governments in the region.
BRLF is also building partnerships with a number of philanthropic foundations. BRLF is partnering with
Collectives of Integrated Livelihood Initiatives (CInI), under the Central India Initiative of the Tata Trusts. This
will give BRLF an opportunity to build an institutional partnership in a high impact project, where the aim is large
improvements in the livelihoods of 1 million small holder farmers, especially in the rain fed areas with
partnership of multiple stakeholders including CSOs. In phase 1, the project targets 50 Blocks and the expected
outcomes are facilitating Smart villages, with improved quality of life choices through systematic investments in
education, health, water and sanitation, ensuring irreversible exit out of poverty for 3 lakh farmers.
BRLF has also been guided by many of its EC members to start work in the North Eastern states which have a
large population of indigenous communities. The Honourable Governors of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh
have written to BRLF expressing interest in exploring a partnership. A team from BRLF will be visiting these
states to discuss the modalities of building a partnership between the states and BRLF.
One key effort of BRLF is collection, documentation, diffusion and dissemination of information for the
furtherance of the objectives of BRLF. The Research and Knowledge Hub of BRLF proposes in due course to
become the national knowledge platform for information and support on issues of NRM, Capacity Building and
Livelihoods for rural communities. BRLF is launching a Fellowship and internship programme as its first
initiative towards this goal. The BRLF fellows programme shall be geared towards creation of exemplary
knowledge pieces on BRLF thematic mandates.
It is still early days for BRLF. I congratulate the small team at BRLF for the remarkable progress achieved in
such a short period of time. I also thank the members of the General Body and Executive Committee of BRLF
for their painstaking guidance at each point. Finally, I wish to thank the Ministry of Rural Development,
Government of India and all the State Governments for their continuous encouragement and support for the
work being pioneered by BRLF.

Dr. Mihir Shah
st

31 August 2015

2

About BRLF

B

harat Rural Livelihoods Foundation (BRLF) has been set up by Government of India as an independent
society to upscale civil society action in partnership with Government. It is an autonomous body,
i
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 .

BRLF was first proposed in Para 111 of the Budget speech made by the Union Minister of Finance in 2012
where it was said: "It is proposed to establish a Bharat Livelihoods Foundation of India through Aajeevika. The
Foundation would support and scale up civil society initiatives and interventions particularly in the tribal regions
covering around 170 districts. Private trusts and philanthropic organizations would be encouraged to partner
with the autonomous body that will be managed professionally". Following this announcement, the Union
Cabinet in its meeting held on 3rd September 2013 decided to set up an independent society to upscale civil
society action in partnership with Government. The Cabinet took cognizance of the failure of development and
governance in central Indian tribal areas, and saw the need to build capacities of rural functionaries, improve
the quality of implementation of flagship programmes in these areas, and end the sense of alienation among
tribal communities towards building back the confidence of people in Indian democracy and governance
structures.
ii

A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed between BRLF and Ministry of Rural Development
(MoRD) on 13th January 2014. As indicated in the MoU, Government of India has decided to release ? 500
Crore for creating the corpus of the new society, in two tranches subject to conditions laid down by the
Expenditure Finance Committee. In addition, funds would also be sourced from concerned State Governments
and philanthropic foundations.
BRLF has been set up to foster and facilitate civil society action in partnership with government for transforming
the livelihoods and lives of people in areas such as the Central Indian Adivasi belt as the initial geography of
focus of the Foundation. The aim is to support interventions at the grassroots towards empowerment of people,
particularly the Adivasi community; and, scaling up of approaches that are innovative both in terms of
programme content and strategy. Innovation can be in myriad directions – technology, social mobilization
approaches, institution building, architecture of partnerships, management techniques etc.
Strategically, each project supported by BRLF will attempt to leverage the vast resources being made available
by both banks and government for a large number of national and/ or state level rural development and
livelihood programmes/ schemes. It is proposed to provide support through BRLF to projects that largely seek
to leverage government programmes and funding already available on the ground.
The initial focus of BRLF will be on the Central Indian Adivasi belt, centred on blocks/ tehsils/ talukas/ mandals
with a >20% Adivasi population in around 1077 blocks (as per 2011 census) across about 190 districts in the
states of Orissa, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Gujaratiii.

i

BRLF was registered on 10th of December, 2013 as an autonomous body under the aegis of Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD). A copy of BRLF Registration certificate is attached as Annexure 1.
A copy of the MoU is attached as Annexure 2
iii
Please refer to https://www.brlf.in/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=b3a68175-f276-485a-adc3-f0a8c926c21c&groupId=11359 for a complete list of blocks to be covered by BRLF in the initial years.
ii

3

Women doing vegetable cultivation in Tapan block, West Bengal (Pre Funding Appraisal, TSRD)
Credits: Rajib Roul

4

I

Our Approach

t is clear that one of the most powerful ways through which the commitment of the state to inclusive growth
can be translated into tangible outcomes on the ground, is to foster powerful partnerships between civil
society and the state. Key objectives of Bharat Rural Livelihoods Foundation (BRLF) are the following:

Facilitate civil society action in collaboration with Government for transforming livelihoods and lives
of rural households, with an emphasis on women, particularly in the Central Indian Tribal Region.
Provide financial grants to civil society organizations (CSOs) to meet their human resource and
institutional costs for up-scaling proven interventions, invest in institutional strengthening of smaller
CSOs and capacity building and development of professional human resources working at the
grassroots.

In this regard, BRLF programmes aim to provide financial and mentoring support to CSOs and other
institutions in domains that usually remain unsupported posing challenges of upscaling and/ or effective
performance. For example, BRLF Grant support focus is on covering human resource and institutional costs of
CSOs for scaling up proven interventions. In this respect, grantee NGO/CSO will be required to source a part of
the project cost from either own or other sources. There will be a cap placed on the proportion of funds to be
spent on administrative purposes by the grantee (other than the salary of professionals). This is further
complimented by the Capacity Building initiative of BRLF which seeks to in parallel create a pool of
development professionals for supporting developmental interventions of Government, CSOs and community
through its CB initiative.
The CB initiative of BRLF shall foster resources to strengthen the institutional network and human capital of
civil society organizations, community based organizations and Panchayati Raj institutions (PRIs) through
design and implementation systems/ platforms needed for such strengthening. Hence, the overall approach of
BRLF is that of a collaborative model of development interventions that build on the existing experiences of
Governance Institutions and community organizations towards inclusive development strategies.
BRLF through its innovative model of institutional design and integrated approach seeks to promote a State –
civil society partnership that empowers people through building sustainable community-owned institutions. In
accordance, our interventionsiv are designed to address the existing procedural, knowledge and strategic gap
through fine tuning of implementation strategies and constant knowledge support and feedback mechanisms
that empowers each of our partners (towards effective implementation practices) and thereby the target
communities. Within its mandate, BRLF also intends to compliment this strategy through specifically supporting
(both financially and knowledge support) innovative pilot projects by its partners in BRLF themes of interest.

BRLF proposes to achieve its key objectives through its work in three verticals.
One of the key mandates of BRLF is to promote sustainable livelihoods with dignity, enlarge space for women,
enhance access to and control over resources for tribal communities, especially women; enhance carrying
capacity of natural resources; responsive, accountable, transparent administrative and self-governance
institutions; creation of a strong and vibrant service demand system and service standards; new opportunities
for the youth and such other outcomes flowing from the objectives of the organization.
One way to achieve this is to reduce the gap between programme outlays and outcomes through strengthening
of democratic institutions of governance at the grass-roots; improved quality of implementation of
programmes; reduced leakages; innovative inclusive strategies of growth and peace in the strife-torn pockets.
Both Grant support and Capacity Building initiatives of BRLF are geared towards achieving these goals
through specific activities to be pursued in collaboration with BRLF partnering institutions.
BRLF also seeks to Promote, work for and assist, through its partnerships and collaborations, the protection,
conservation and regeneration of the social and natural environment and cultural and social heritage of tribal
communities. This also involves collection, documentation, diffusion and dissemination of information for the
furtherance of the objects of BRLF by various means, including, inter alia, the verbal, written, audio, visual,
audio-visual, online and theatrical mediums and for that purpose to publish, issue, produce, sponsor and
circulate books, policy papers, working papers on innovative think pieces, pamphlets, papers, bulletins,
journals etc., performances, seminars, consultations, workshops, exhibitions or similar events. The Research
and Knowledge Hub of BRLF proposes in due course to become the national knowledge platform for
information and support on issues of NRM and Livelihoods for rural communities.
To facilitate this inter-related domains of work, BRLF proposes to pursue its programmes on Grant Support,
Capacity Building and Research & Knowledge Hub towards institutional strengthening of CSOs, CBOs and
elected / bureaucratic functionaries / line departments and promote a partnership/ collaborative model of
intervention amongst the stakeholders.
5

Conducting Participatory Rural Appraisal activities in the villages (Pre Funding Appraisal, Prasari)
Credits: Rajib Roul

iv
The intervention projects referred to here are community based organizations/civil society organizations/other charitable and training institution projects that BRLF would support and necessarily
involve leveraging program resources from State and Central government flagship program and schemes.

6

Thematic Focus of BRLF Interventions
Co-finance Institutional
partnerships

Watershed
Management

Collaborative knowledge
development and
management
with BRLF partners
and research institutions

Leveraging existing
government resources

CPRs

professionals
Skill based education
for youth
CB of government
functionaries, elected
representatives and CSOs

Human Resource and
institutional costs of CSOs
Scaling up proven
interventions in NRM and
Livelihoods
Innovative pilots on
community interventions
Institutional strengthening of

Facilitation of co-learning

smaller CSOs

platforms for BRLF

Convergence practice

partners and practitioners

between CSOs and State
institutions

Evaluation research and
need assessments on sectoral
needs and future directions
Case studies on best practices
and innovative projects
Publications and policy
papers on NRM and
Livelihoods.

Forest Management

OUTCOMES
Sustainable
Livelihoods with
Dignity

Participatory Irrigation Management
Improved Agriculture

RESEARCH & KNOWLEDGE HUB

development

GRANT SUPPORT

Training programs for

Sustainable planning, management, usage and distribution
of water resources
Groundwater Management

Sustainable
Livelihoods

CAPACITY BUILDING (CB)

Enhanced
partnership
possibilities
between the
State and
Civil Society
towards
inclusive
development
strategies

Establishment of innovative
learning, skill development
and education models in
partnership with academic
institutions and
professional learning
centres

Value chain
Development

Skill Development

BRLF attempts to support grassroots projects which are largely aimed at leveraging the financial resources
being made available by both banks and government for a large number of rural development programmes.
BRLF would support proposals which seek to leverage programme funds through existing government
programmes and banks, so as to finally suggest reforms and innovative ideas to improve the functioning of
government flagship programmes.
Even though its own support will not primarily include programme funding, BRLF will have an important role in
catalyzing and ensuring availability of programme funds for the projects to be supported by it, through
developing coordination mechanisms, MOUs, with State Governments and other relevant institutions in target
regions. The thematic content of work to be supported will include (though not necessarily limited to) the
following as discussed in Figure 3. Projects that visualize convergence across the above thematic areas are
more likely to be supported by BRLF.

NTFPs, Agro-biodiversity

Drinking water
Sanitation
Solid and Liquid waste management
Agricultural sustainability

Food and Nutrition
security

Enhanced carrying
capacities of
resources

Educated and trained PRIs, other government functionaries

Housing
Integrated Habitat
Improvement

Enhanced access
to and control
over resources

Agriculture/ horticulture/ Animal Husbandry & allied sectors

Skill training for CSOs and CBOs for enhanced participation

programs

In order to be able to achieve the above mandates BRLF proposes to raise resources through permissible
channels, to finance its stated objectives functions. The permissible channels include Institutions, Banks (like
NABARD, SBI, Central bank etc.), PSUs, Corporate sector/CSR, Philanthropy (individuals included), National
and International Donor agencies and Charitable organizations. All government clearances and permissions
will be obtained as per prevailing regulations while raising the resources.

Fisheries
Forestry, etc

Equipped rural professionals

Fellowship and Internship

Figure 1 : BRLF Verticals and Programmes

Dairying

Appropriate technology (NPM, SRI, etc)
Building climate change resistance in agriculture

Responsive,
Accountable,
Transparent

Administration and
self-governance
institutions

Food Safety and nutrition
Strengthening Adivasi and women leadership in CSOs
Local Institution
Building

Capacity Building
of Stakeholders

Entitlements /
Development
Programs
Knowledge
Development /
Research

Empowered and informed PRIs and other government
functionaries
Community owned institutions
Introduction/ Adoption of new pedagogies of functional
education and skill training
Institutional networks across the agri-value chain for
appropriate resource mobilisation, availability and access
Social Mobilization

Improved
performance of
government
programmes

Strong, vibrant and
participatory
community based
organizations

Awareness generation
Evaluation research, Impact studies, Need Assessments
Policy oriented research and knowledge tools
Sectoral knowledge Hub - livelihoods, sustainability and NRM
Figure 2 : BRLF themes of intervention

7

8

Partners: PRADAN, FES, SRIJAN, BAIF
Districts: Sirohi, Bhaswara, Udaipur, Pali

Geographical Focus

Partners: AKRSPI, BAIF, PARHIT, SRIJAN, FES,
PRADAN
Districts: Barwani, Dhar, Khargone, Khandwa,
Burhanpur, Betul, Sheopur, Guna, Shivpuri,
Balaghat, Singrauli, Mandla, Shahdol,
Chhindwara and Annupur

Jammu and Kashmir

of BRLF Interventions

Partners: PRADAN, SRIJAN
Districts: Dhamtari, Uttar Bastar Kenker, Bastar,
Raigarh, Koriya

Himachal
Pradesh
Punjab

B

Uttarakhand

Ha
ry

an

a

RLF is to carry a pan India focus, however the initial focus of the BRLF will be on the Central Indian Adivasi
belt, centered on sub-districts with more than 20% Adivasi population in around 1077 sub-districts across
about 190 districts in the States of Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh,
Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Gujarat.

Sikkim

Rajasthan

The initial focus is on sub-districts because Adivasis in India (outside of the North-East) tend to be concentrated
in sub-districts rather than districts. In order that the development and governance process becomes truly
inclusive and its benefits reach the Adivasi people, a focus on sub-districts is essential.

Arunachal
Pradesh

Delhi
Uttar Pradesh
Assam

Bihar

Meghalaya

Jharkhand

Madhya Pradesh

Ch
ha
ttis
ga
rh

Gujarat

nd
Nagala
ur
nip
a
M

Tripura

West
Bengal

Mizoram

Orissa

Maharashtra
Telangana

Goa Karnataka

d
An

hr

rad
aP

Partners: BAIF, PRADAN
h
es

Districts: Khunti, Paschimi Singhbhum,
Godda, Gumla, Dumka, Hazaribag, Lohardaga,
Bokaro, Ramgarh
Partners: PRADAN
Districts: Bankura, Purulia, Paschim Midnapur

Tamil Nadu

ala
Ker

Cabbage Cultivation in Madhyapur
village in Keonjhar district, Odisha
(PFA Shrishti-CINI)
Credits: Vriti

Partners: SRIJAN, PRADAN, SEWA, FES
Districts: Jharsuguda, Sambalpur, Khandhamal,
Kalahandi, Koraput, Rayagada, Angul
Partners: BAIF, SRIJAN, FES

Chindboh is one of the village in the Mohkhed block in which
SRIJAN team is facilitating the layout training for the tribal
community for the organic Horticulture programme.
Credits: Mr.Mohd. Zahid

Districts: Gadchiroli, Nandurbar, Gondiya,
Yavatmal
Partners: AKRSPI, BAIF, FES

Interculture of peanut by earthen up machine by kajalimandi (demonstration of crop on nutrition), Purulia
Credits: Pradan

9

Districts: Dangs, Vyara, Tapi, Navsari, Surat,
Valsad, Mahisagar
10

Governance
T

he General Body and Executive Committee of BRLF include representatives of central and state
governments, eminent persons from academia, civil society and the corporate sector, financial institutions,
public sector undertakings and philanthropic foundations with demonstrated experience, understanding and
commitment to the issues of concern to BRLF.
The governance structure of BRLF has been designed to foster successful partnerships with the state
governments across India. Involvement of States is crucial at the project grantee selection stage. All concerned
State Governments are members of the PGSC and they have participated in the first PGSC on 18-19
December, 2014. State Government representatives are very keen to have a system of collaboration and
coordination between them and BRLF; agreements with States will be signed soon.
BRLF has moved rapidly in setting up its systemsv, Governance Structure, recruitment of a competent team
from the open market, and putting in place all the policies and procedures. It has already started delivering on
its mandate on the ground. An interim authorization allowing BRLF to incur expenditures as per the GFR of
Government of India was issued by MoRD on 5th January 2015. The BRLF FM too was approved subsequently
with official orders yet to be released. Post necessary approvals, BRLF has successfully proceeded with the
Grant in Aid process and work on Ground has also started.
BRLF has also entered into an agreement with MoRD with an understanding to look at a new model of
partnership wherein Government proactively engages with private philanthropies, public and private sector
undertakings (as part of their corporate social responsibility) as well as other stake-holder groups to raise
resources to support and scale up proven interventions of civil society organizations.
BRLF has successfully formulated its basic operating policies, including grant approval and monitoring
systems and an HR policy. A smaller committee from the EC has been constituted for Project and Grantee
Selection. As per the by-laws, the Project and Grantee Selection Committee has devised the norms and policy
of grant making leading to a Grant in Aid Policy. BRLF also has in place a robust system for proposal appraisal
and pre-funding evaluation, including field based evaluations by external evaluators. The first PGSC meeting
was held on 18th-19th Dec 2014, PGSC in the first round of selection procedure has approved seven project
proposals. Details of these seven projects has been shared in following sections.

BRLF
General Body

President

Executive Committee (EC)

Executive Asstt.
to the CEO

Chief Finance
Officer

CEO

Program
Officers

Project and Grantee
Selection Committee
(PGSC)

Sexual Harassment
Committee

Capacity Building
Steering Committee

Program
Executives

Research and Institutional
Partnership Officer
Executives

Accounts
Officer
Administrative
and HR Officer
Office
Assistant

Institutional Partners
Other Partners
Knowledge / Institutional
leverage partners

Direct Project
Implementation Partners
Co-financed by BRLF

Figure 3: Organizational arrangement of BRLF

To ensure full transparency in the project sanction process, BRLF has hired Tata Consultancy Services (TCS)
to develop an IT enabled end-to-end transaction based management information system, which will enable a
process of online project application and development. The software is a first of its kind that we hope would
become a milestone in the Prime Minister's vision of e-tenderingand transparency in governance systems in
India.

v

A new BRLF website has been launched and can be accessed at:www.brlf.in. BRLF is located at C-32, IInd Floor, RATNA VILAS, Neeti Bagh, New Delhi-110 049.

11

BRLF team: Sitting (L-R): Mr. Ravi Prakash, Mr. Zulfiquar Haider, Mr. Sharad Bhargava, Mr. Kuldip Singh;
Standing (L-R): Ms. Vriti Sawhney, Mr. Rajib Kumar Roul, Dr. Aruna Pandey, Ms. Shipra Bhatia, Mr. Sushil Pal, MrPouloush

12

The software-Aid 360 provides transparent traceability to every action from selection of grantees to monitoring
the outcomes of the projects supported by BRLF. Registered partners can now apply for BRLF grant by
submitting their proposals through the online platform. In addition BRLF can carry out extensive evaluation
activities in a transparent and swift manner.
The Human Resource (HR) Policy of BRLF has been developed and approved by its Executive committee in its
meeting on 25th March 2015. It includes the entire scope of HR processes around employee benefits and
compensation, performance appraisal systems, etc. The HR policy also includes a clear policy on Prevention of
Sexual Harassment at Workplace. In this regard, a complaints committee has also been set up with the
approval and direction of the EC. Following the procedures clearly laid out in the HR Policy, BRLF has
successfully completed recruitment of the core team members. An internship and fellowship policy is also being
pursued at BRLF through the EC. A smaller sub-committee has been appointed by the EC to oversee its
progress and guide the BRLF core team in its design and structure. A draft internship, fellows and institutional
partnership policy aimed at study of partner experience in improving implementation of flagship programmes
and its documentation, so as to provide the Government with inputs on the same, has been developed in this
regard and is currently under review.
The first meeting of the General Body of BRLF was held on 4th April 2014 at Room No. 122, Planning
Commission, New Delhi. A Finance and Audit Committee has been established by the EC in the meeting, under
the guidance of rules and regulations of the society. In addition, an External Auditor from among the CAG
vi
panel . During this meeting the EC also decided upon the Corpus Management Policy of BRLF. As per
directions from EC the corpus fund has been put in a bank Fixed Deposit to avoid any forms of investment risks.
Two subsequent EC meetings have been held on 19th Dec, 2014 and 25th March 2015 towards finalisation of
other procedures of operation of BRLF. Further necessary Statutory Permissions on behalf of BRLF have been
vii
obtained. These include a Registration of Section 12A and an 80 G certification under IT Act .

T

T

ransparency and
Accountability

o set the highest standards of transparency and accountability, BRLF has done full disclosure of its
accounts and activities by placing both its annual reports and audited accounts on its website. The AID 360
grant management tool provides the concerned stakeholders an opportunity to be able to monitor the progress
of each project submitted/ undertaken by BRLF. Through the software tool partners of BRLF can track the endto-end project development and management process with high traceability of project/ proposal status. The
software also permits the BRLF team to be able to monitor the outcomes of each project. In the event of any
delays on the project, the tool automatically generates alerts to ensure effective and timely handling of project
activities and status. The web presence of platform (with downloadable content for minimum web-time
requirement) further ensures high accessibility and accountability of all stakeholders involved.
BRLF has also pro-actively made relevant information available under the Right to Information Act, 2005. The
BRLF is also subject to Audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India.
The AID 360 platform of BRLF developed in collaboration with Tata Consultancy Services enables
transparent progress monitoring of each project undertaken by BRLF

BRLF has opened four separate accounts for receiving the corpus amount from the Government of India, to
receive co-finance support from other donors and for receiving grants under FCRA. The details of these
accounts are provided below:

For Corpus funds received:

For FCRA Registration:

Account Name

Account Name

: Bharat Rural Livelihoods
Foundation
Account Number : 000394600000384
Account Type
: Savings
Name of the Bank : Yes Bank Limited
Plot Number- 11/46, Shopping
Centre, Diplomatic Enclave,
Malcha Marg, New Delhi-110021

: Bharat Rural Livelihoods
Foundation
Account Number : 000393900000039
Account Type
: Savings
Name of the Bank : Yes Bank Limited
Plot Number- 11/46, Shopping
Centre, Diplomatic Enclave,
Malcha Marg, New Delhi-110021

For funds received from other donors:

For funds received from Tata Trust Endowment Fund
for Institutional Development and Partnerships

Account Name

: Bharat Rural Livelihoods
Foundation
Account Number : 000394600000391
Account Type
: Savings
Name of the Bank : Yes Bank Limited
Plot Number- 11/46, Shopping
Centre, Diplomatic Enclave,
Malcha Marg, New Delhi-110021

vi

13

Meeting with community members for planning.
Village: Chabukmari, Narayanpatna Block,
Dist. Koraput. February 2015
Credits: Bijay Toppo

AID 360
Platform

Custard apple collection centre established
in the village
Credits: SRIJAN

Account Name

: Bharat Rural Livelihoods
Foundation
Account Number : 000394600000443
Account Type
: Savings
Name of the Bank : Yes Bank Limited
Plot Number- 11/46, Shopping
Centre, Diplomatic Enclave,
Malcha Marg, New Delhi-110021

The accounts of the society for the year 2014-15 were audited by M/S Ava and Associates Chartered Accountants who are one of the empanelled CAs with the office of the Controller and Auditor
General of India. The report is annexed as Annexure 5
vii
Annexure 3 and 4

Baseline and needs assessment survey by
community resource person in a village in Kadana
block of Mahisagar district, Gujarat by FES team member.
Credits: FES

World Water Day 2015 celebration at panchayat samiti Jhadol,
District- Udaipur, Rajasthan.
Credits: Sh. Hemant

14

A

Fund Mobilization
s per the MoU with MoRD, BRLF is to raise ? 100 Crore (Rupees One Hundred Crore) of private

contribution either through corpus contribution or through annual grants / co-financing by other donors.
The current status of fund mobilization for BRLF is as follows:
Corpus Fund: BRLF has received ? 10 crore as corpus contribution (? 5 Crore from the Navajbai Ratan Tata
Trust and another ? 5 Crore from Sir Dorabji Tata Trust). Another 1.5 Million USD (~ ? 9 Cr) have been
committed by Ford Foundation but the money has not been received.
Annual Grants: ? 1 crore has been raised as annual grants, including ? 90 lakh from the UNDP
Co-financing is an essential pre-requisite of every proposal submitted to BRLF. Of the total project cost to be
supported by BRLF, minimum 20 percent is to be met from sources other than BRLF. Of the 7 proposals
sanctioned by BRLF, a co-finance amount of ~? 65 Crore has been secured by the partners, of which ~?25 Cr is
from private sources and ~? 40 Cr from various government programmes and Govt. institutions like NABARD.

Animal Vaccination in Zhininiya Cluster
Credits: AKRSPI

Pulse pulp processing using pulper
Credits: SRIJAN

15

Poultry Farming in Tapan Block, West Bengal
(Pre Funding Appraisal, TSRD),
Credits: Rajib Roul

Azola cultivation
(Pre Funding Appraisal,Prasari)
Credits: Rajib Roul

Intercultural operation in SRI field
(Pre Funding Appraisal, Prasari)
Credits: Rajib Roul

Mr. Kashiram Tekam is one of the hard working farmers
in the Mehlari village of Mohkhed block involving activity of pit filling.
Organic manure like Vermicompost, Neem cake,
Mahua Cake and Castor cake is mixed with
soil during the pit filling process.
Credits: Mr. Mohd. Zahid

B

Projects and Activities

RLF projects and activities are structured around its three verticals. Key projects/ activities pursued during
2014-15 by BRLF are:

Grant Support
BRLF has moved ahead with call for proposals from potential CSO partners that are inclined to work with
Government's schemes and programmes while ensuring their quality implementation and scale up. BRLF
launched its first Call for Proposals on April 15, 2014 soliciting applications from civil society organizations for
projects that seek to leverage government programmes and funding in the central Indian tribal belt. Around
127 proposals were received by the deadline; all these have been assessed for necessary compliances and
reviewed by the BRLF team and 77 proposals were found to be incomplete or not as per the criteria; 7 are still
being reviewed; 7 have been sanctioned and 22 are under various stages of Field appraisal. Table 1 below
gives details of the proposal received and their current status.

Proposal Category

Number

Status/ Remarks

Total Proposals received till date

161

Enquiries/concept notes/
proposals received against first
CFP (within the deadline)

127

In between 15th April 2014 to
15th September 2014

Proposals assessed

127 (113 were complete
proposals)

Includes PFA –I and Desk
review (out of 127, 113 were
complete proposals, rest were
enquiries/concept notes, etc)

Proposals rejected

77

Rejection letter sent

Proposals sanctioned

7

Sanction letter issued and MoU
signed, Grant has been
released

Proposals selected for PFA II

22

7 PFA II completed; 15 under
planning

Proposals pending for decision

7

Internal review to be done

Proposals received after CFP

35

To be considered during the
next CFP

Figure 4 : Details of Proposals received (PFA – Pre-funding Appraisal, CFP – Call for Proposal)
16

The next set of proposals that meet the field appraisal criteria will be taken to the next PGSC meeting. The
essential requirements for every proposal submitted to BRLF are as follows:
• Leveraging resources from government flagship programmes and/or banks
• Co-financing by at least one other donor. Of the total project cost supported by BRLF, at least 20 per cent
must be co-financed by some other donor. This does not include the cost leveraged from government
flagship programmes and/or banks or the contribution of local communities
• Focus on tribal, especially women's empowerment
• Capacity building activities of CSOs/PRIs/government officials/village youth/women groups and
federations

Number of households with direct benefit from porject outcomes
Enhanced financial inclusion of women through PM’s Jan Dhan
Yojana

250,000

Ensuring food security through enhancement of agricultural
productivity

163,697

Enhanced soil health through sustainable practices

One key mandate of BRLF is to ensure that all partner CSOs work in partnership with State Government and
ensure implementation of Governments flagship programme and schemes, as well as work towards innovative
ideas. Towards this objective, the following pilots and interventions are now part of the seven approved
projects:
• All partners will try to ensure that farmers adapt Non-Pesticide Management agriculture by end of the
Project period.
• Prime Minister's Swatch Bharat Abhiyan: Sanitation works and/or Pilot on solid and liquid waste
management
• Prime Minister's Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY): All proposals to ensure financial inclusion of all participants
• Participatory ground water management- Partners to include pilots on the same
• Prime Minister's Soil Health Card Scheme- all partners to facilitate implementation with all participant
families.
• Partners to facilitate implementation of promotion of value chains around different marketable products
Partners have also been notified to ensure incorporation of the following new 'yojana's' announced by the
Honorable Prime Minister:
• Prime Minister's Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY): All proposals to ensure that all participants get covered
under PMSBY
• Prime Minister's Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY): All proposals to ensure that all participants get
covered under PMJJBY
Efforts towards capacity building/ strengthening of CBOs through the sanctioned projects shall lead to
establishment/ strengthening of 4,465 SHG/ Farmers Club/ Village Development Committee; 19 Federations/
Producer Organizations/ Cooperatives; and strengthening of 30 smaller CSOs through training and fund
support. In addition, BRLF has approved grants for piloting Swatch Bharat Abhiyan (sanitation/ drinking water/
solid and liquid waste management) in 30 villages with the target regions of the projects. Also the projects
sanctioned shall result in Land development activities in target regions across 111,000 hectares.

163,697

Agricultural Risk Mitigation through land and water resource
development / PM

103,683

Adoption of Non Pesticide Management

163,697
26,810

Promotion of non-farm based livelihood activities
Enhanced income through NTFP based livelihoods

3,560

Promotion of alternate source of energy-solar, biogas, wind, etc

5,100

Additional sustainale income through multiple income generation
activities ( increase of Rs 20,000- Rs 40, 000 per HH annually)

210,994
0

50,000

100,000

150,000

200,000

250,000

300,000

The following graphs give an overview of the kind of interventions, their outcomes and estimated number of
families which stand to benefit from each of these based on the 7 CSO grant support proposals sanctioned by
BRLF.

No. of persons benefitting from capacity building interventions

Employment and skill development
Capacity building of CRP (community
resource person)
Capacity building of Rural livelihoods
professionals
0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

Bamboo Craft in village Chabukmari, Narayanpatna Block, Koraput- Dist, March 2015.
Credits: Pradip Mishra

17

18

Key Interventions planned in the approved projects

Major Government schemes and programmes to be leveraged
1.

Prime Minister's Swatch Bharat Abhiyan: Sanitation works and/or Pilot on solid and liquid
waste management

1.

Participatory ground water management pilots

2.

Prime Minister's Soil Health Card Scheme

2.

Prime Minister's Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY): ensure financial inclusion of all participants

3.

Promotion of value chains around different marketable products

3.

Prime Minister's Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY)

4.

4.

Prime Minister's Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY)

Land and water resources augmentation aimed at livelihood enhancement covering most
targeted villages

5.

Integrated Watershed Management Programme

5.

Integrated watershed management

6.

Department of Tribal Development

6.

Agriculture productivity enhancement covering most targeted villages

7.

Gujarat Water Resource Development Corporation

7.

Participatory irrigation management

8.

Department of Animal husbandry

8.

Development of horticulture and Tree based Farming

9.

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Grantee Act

9.

Dairy development and Animal Husbandry, especially small ruminants for PVTG

10.

Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana

10.

Promotion of value chain including processing of Custard apple, spices, minor millets and NTFP

11.

National Health Mission

11.

Large scale promotion of conservation agriculture and promotion of Non Pesticide Management

12.

National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture

12.

13.

National Rural Livelihoods Mission

Facilitating creation of market linked production clusters for high value cash crops in selected
clusters

14.

Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana

13.

Promotion of mass level women CBOs and women SHG federations

15.

Water and Sanitation Management Organization, Govt of Gujrat

14.

leveraging credit through Bank linkages

16.

National Bank Credit & NABFIN Credit

15.

Promotion and establishment of farmers producer companies

17.

Central Silk Board, Ministry of Textiles

16.

18.

West Bengal Accelerated Development of Minor Irrigation Project

Capacity building of community institutions/PRI, especially on participatory planning of flagship
livelihoods schemes covering all targeted villages

19.

National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development - Tribal Development Fund

17.

Strengthening of CSO Networks to create joint action in Central Indian Adivasi region (CIAR)

18.

Facilitate the better implementation of the provisions of PESA and the FRA for better governance
and just distribution and ownership of resources.

19.

Capacity building and development of cadre of community resource professionals
Table (above) summarises some of the major interventions planned to be
leveraged/pursued within the mandate of 7 approved projects of BRLF.

Construction of Brushwood Check Dam: Village: Kalaspur, Panchayat: Balikuma, Block: Kankadahad, Dist: Dhenkanal, Odisha.
Credits: Dawa Pemba Sherpa

19

20

B

Project Partners

RLF, through the present 7 CSO projects is well on its way to reaching the target of 1, 00,000 families in its
first two years of operations. As per the Grant agreements already signed with 7 partners, they envisage
reaching out to 3,42,987 Families over a five year period, out of which minimum 66% are estimated to be from
the ST community. As mentioned in table 3 above, these participant households are spread over ~ 4300
Villages, across 60 Districts, 101 Sub-districtsand 8 States. BRLF is likely to partner with another 10-15
organizations by August 2015, reaching out to many. This section presents a brief on the existing 7 CSO
partners of BRLF.

Name of NGO

States proposed

No. of
Districts

No. of
blocks

No. of
villages

AKRSPI

Gujarat, MP

10

16

295

BAIF

MP, Rajasthan, Gujarat,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra

7

9

160

PARHIT

MP

3

4

215

SOCIAL EDUCATION FOR
WOMENS AWARENESS (SEWA)

Odisha

2

3

106

PRADAN

MP, Rajasthan, Odisha, Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, West Bengal

25

50

3000

SRIJAN

MP, Odisha, Maharashtra,
Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan

7

12

305

FES

MP, Rajasthan, Gujarat,
Odisha, Maharashtra

6

7

236

60

101

4,317

Total

Land preparation activity for Kitchen garden by SHG members: Date: Feb 2014
Village: Laimunda, Panchayat: Kothabhuin, Block: Angul, Dist: Angul
Credits: Dawa Pemba Sherpa

21

22

Brief About the Project

AKRSPI

(Aga Khan Rural Support Programme, India)
The Aga Khan Rural Support Programme (India) is a non-denominational, non-government development
organisation. AKRSPI works as a catalyst for the betterment of rural communities by providing direct support to
local communities to promote activities and develop models for sustainable natural resource use and
development of human resources. After 25 years of work, AKRSPI today is active in over 1900 villages in four
environmentally challenged and economically vulnerable regions of Gujarat. AKRSPI also works in the states
of Madhya Pradesh and Bihar.
In the proposed partnership with BRLF, AKRSPI seeks to: (i) Promote effective governance at grass root level
(ii) Create a productive asset base at household and village level (iii) Enhance the capacities of smaller Civil
Society Organizations and Grass root government employees of MP and Gujarat.

PROJECT TITLE:

Enhancing Tribal Livelihoods through Integrated Planning and Implementation of
Flagship Rural Livelihoods Activities
GEOGRAPHICAL FOCUS

Name of States

Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat

Number of Districts

10

Number of Blocks

16
OUTREACH

Number of Villages

295
23,700

Number of Households
Number of tribal families to be covered (%)

90%

KEY THEMATIC AREAS OF OPERATION
Water and land resource development, Capacity building for improving local governance, Livestock development,
Participatory irrigation management, Women empowerment, Productivity enhancement

AKRSPI - Proposed Theme Wise Fund Utilization
2.02%

Mason training in Dedtalai cluster.
Credits: AKRSPI

0.58%

15.16%
33.77%
Water and Land Resource Development

15.56%

Institution Building
Sustainable Agriculture
32.91%

Dairy Development
Livestock Management

Vaccination camp for livestock in Zhininiya cluster.
Credits: AKRSPI

23

Energy
24

Brief About the Project

BAIF Development Research Foundation
BAIF is a professionally managed non-profit Public Trust, established by, Late Dr. Manibhai Desai in 1967 to
promote sustainable livelihood in Rural India. BAIF is committed to provide sustainable livelihood to the rural
poor through management of natural resources and promotion of livestock development, watershed
development and agriculture, horticulture and, forestry as major income generation activities. BAIF is serving
over 4.5 million poor families living in 60,000 villages spread over 16 states across the country through the
dedicated efforts of over 4500 employees & 13 associate organizations.

PROJECT TITLE:

In the proposed partnership with BRLF, BAIF seeks to: (i) Improve the farm based livelihoods conditions of the
targeted families (ii) Improve the livestock practices (iii) Improve forest based livelihoods (iv) Introduce and
develop non-farm enterprises (v) Augment natural resources of the targeted villages (vi) Improve community
health interventions

Number of Districts

7

Number of Blocks

9

Adivasi Livelihood Project in Central India
GEOGRAPHICAL FOCUS
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh

Name of States

OUTREACH
Number of Villages

160
30,200

Number of Households
Number of tribal families to be covered (%)

60%

KEY THEMATIC AREAS OF OPERATION

Sustainable livelihoods through improved Agriculture, Tree based farming, Water Resource Management, Cattle
development, NTFP, Local institutional building and their strengthening

ed
Bas
m
r
ds
-fa
Non velihoo
Li

Interaction with GP, South Gujarat.
Credits: BAIF

Li
Dev vestoc
elop k
men
t

Forest Based
Livelihoods

Institution
Building

Capacity
Building

Awareness Meeting, Betul, Madhya Pradesh.
Credist: BAIF

25

Health
Natural Resource
Management
and Water Resources
Development
26

Brief About the Project

Foundation for Ecological Security (FES)
Spread across diverse ecological and social geographies characterized by high level of degradation and
poverty, FES works towards conservation of nature and natural resources (forest, land and water) through
collective action of local communities and improving the living conditions of the rural poor. Currently, FES is
working in six eco-regions of the country, across 32 districts in nine states reaching out to 10296 village
institutions and over 5.7 million people and bringing 3.8 million acres of land under eco restoration and
community governance.

PROJECT TITLE:

In the proposed partnership with BRLF, FES seeks to (i)Improve the democratic functioning of Panchayats by
strengthening institutional mechanisms, that would improve the implementation of various schemes and
programs in general and governance of natural resources in particular. (ii)Enabling claims to rights and
entitlements and improving access to services which would help in reducing vulnerability. (iii)Improve capacity
of the communities by training and building a rural cadre of local youth to assist the communities in better
planning, implementation and monitoring of development programmes. (iv)Improvement in forests and other
common lands and water bodies so as to support tribal livelihoods.

Number of Districts

6

Number of Blocks

7

Reaching the Last Mile: Strengthening Capacities in Tribal Areas
GEOGRAPHICAL FOCUS
Odisha, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh

Name of States

OUTREACH
Number of Villages

236
29,897

Number of Households
Number of tribal families to be covered (%)

60%

KEY THEMATIC AREAS OF OPERATION
Strengthening institutions and local self-governance, Improving local capacities for better planning and implementation of
development projects, Leveraging government programmes for sustainable livelihoods, securing tenure rights of communities
on commons (forests, pastures, revenue wastelands)

FES- Proposed Theme Wise Fund Utilization

Understanding the drainage system, March 2015, Goobri village-Bichiya, Mandla district by FES team member.
Credits: FES

1.47%
4.47%
3.35%

0.91%
0.06%

16.22%

0.09%
4.10%

Soil and Water Conservation
Energy Conservation Programmes
Social Security
Capacity Building
Innovations and pilot

69.32%

Community Property Resources
Water and Land Resource Development
Off-Farm Livelihood Activities

Measurement of earthen bund by rural para-workers (Date: June 2014) Village: Tabda, Panchayat: Antulia, Block: Angul, Dist: Angul.
Credits: Dawa Pemba Sherpa

27

Sustainable Agriculture
28

Social Education for Women's Awareness
(SEWA), Odisha
SEWA was founded in 1991-92 as a non-political, non-sectarian; non-religious, non-profit making, nongovernmental organization and its activities cover peripheral rural localities as well as several other parts of the
district and neighboring districts. While its main focus is on livelihood, self-governance and especially rural and
tribal women, it also caters to the needs of the socio-economically deprived communities of Jharsuguda and
Sambalpur districts.
In the proposed partnership with BRLF, SEWA seeks to reduce poverty in 15 GPs of Laikera and Kolabira
blocks in Jharsuguda & 5 GPs of Kuchinda block in Sambalpur district. This would be achieved via the more
immediate development objective of enabling rural households to take up sustainable livelihood opportunities
integrated with wider economy.

Brief About the Project
PROJECT TITLE:

Integrated Livelihood Support Project (ILSP)
GEOGRAPHICAL FOCUS

Name of States

Odisha

Number of Districts

2

Number of Blocks

3
OUTREACH

Number of Villages

106
19,754

Number of Households
Number of tribal families to be covered (%)

80%

KEY THEMATIC AREAS OF OPERATION
Strengthening and empowering community based institutions, leveraging funds from various
flagship programmes.

SEWA- Proposed Theme Wise Fund Utilization
2.26%

2.01%

0.36%

Mango transplantation in Kundurusingha village.
Credits: SEWA

19.50%

Other Income Generation Activities
57.50%
17.68%

Water and Land Development
Soil and Water Conservation
Sustainable Agriculture
Horticulture
Dairy and Poultry Farming

Village Job card holders meeting
Credits: SEWA

29

0.68%

Institution Building
30

Professional Assistance for Development Action
(PRADAN)
PRADAN works in India's poorest region building self-sustaining rural communities through social, economic
and political empowerment of women. Developing scalable models to build self-reliance, enhance rural
livelihoods, building peoples' institutions and mainstreaming these for large scale impact is at the core of
PRADAN's work. PRADAN currently works with 374,008 families in 5,766 villages spread in 118 blocks of 39
districts. 73 % of these families belonged to vulnerable groups such as Scheduled Tribes (STs) and Scheduled
Castes (SCs).
In the proposed partnership with BRLF, PRADAN seeks to (i) Create collectives of women while maintaining
strategic partnership of the collectives with PRIs to improve local governance, (ii) Deepen and expand
livelihoods (iii) Partner with other CSOs through existing networks in the region to facilitate a convergence
approach to the intervention.

Brief About the Project
PROJECT TITLE:

Catalysing Large-scale Transformation in Central Indian Adivasi Regions
GEOGRAPHICAL FOCUS
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Jharkhand,
Rajasthan and West Bengal

Name of States
Number of Districts

25

Number of Blocks

50
OUTREACH

Number of Villages

3000
2,00,000

Number of Households
Number of tribal families to be covered (%)

60%

KEY THEMATIC AREAS OF OPERATION
Sustainable Livelihoods, Governance and Institution Building (Collectives), Building community
capabilities and assets.

le
b
a
ain ture
t
s
Su icul
A gr
Women practicing raising nursery in tray in Purulia.
Credits: PRADAN

Capacity
Building

M Live
an s
a g t oc
em k
en
t

Institution
Building
Non-farm
Based
Livelihoods

Women writing cash book after learning in functional literacy center in Purulia.
Credits: PRADAN

31

32

Self-Reliant Initiatives through Joint Action
(SRIJAN)
Self-Reliant Initiatives through Joint Action (SRIJAN) is a national professional agency that is engaged in
livelihoods promotion for the rural poor. It works closely with state and national governments on policy reforms.
As a development agency it is committed to promoting sustainable and self-reliant models of development. It
currently works in 18 districts of five states, reaching out to 40,000 rural poor families (approx. 200,000
population) by livelihoods promotion and community institution development.
In the proposed partnership with BRLF, SRIJAN seeks to (i) Improve farm and animal productivity, and to
reduce the cost of cultivation (ii) To increase income security opportunities for the poor (iii) To empower the rural
poor women by ensuring their participation in local decision making processes (iv) Establish self-governance
system and make it more accountable and transparent (v) Fill the gaps in the human resources to strengthen
ongoing programmes.

Brief About the Project
PROJECT TITLE:

Jyotirgamaya (Light of Development) Livelihoods security for and building capacity among
16000 tribal families in five districts of Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra and Rajasthan
GEOGRAPHICAL FOCUS

Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan

Name of States
Number of Districts

7

Number of Blocks

12
OUTREACH

Number of Villages

305
16,000

Number of Households
Number of tribal families to be covered (%)

60%

KEY THEMATIC AREAS OF OPERATION

Sustainable Livelihoods, Governance and Institution Building (Collectives), Building
community capabilities and assets.

SRIJAN- Propsed Theme Wise Fund Utilization
2.11%
6.81%
Pit digging for the organic orchard plantation in the village of Mainikhapa of Mohkhed block. Pit Size: 1mX1mX1m.
Credits:Mr.Mohd. Zahid

28.42%
Capacity Building

60.19%

Natural Resource Management
Sustainable Agriculture

Guava plant planted by Mrs. Phudiya Bai and Mrs. Ujani Bai
in the orchard of Mr.Ujarlal Tekam in the village Mehlari.
Credits: Mr.Mohd. Zahid

33

2.47%

Horticulture
Innovations and Pilots
34

Consortium Project: Parhit Samaj Sevi Sansthan
(lead partner)
The consortium is formed of Parhit Samaj Sevi Sansthan (lead partner), Kalptaru Vikas Samiti, Dharti
Gramotthan Evam Shabhagi Gramin Vikas Samiti, Nishwarth Sarthak Prayas Evam Parivar Kalyan Samiti
(NISWARTH). The members of the consortium have been working on natural resource management, capacity
building of PRIs and other community based organizations, water-sanitation and hygiene, women
empowerment and child education.The members have worked in Tikamgarh, Guna, Morena, Sheopur,
Shivpuri and Bundelkhand districts of Madhya Pradesh.
In the proposed partnership with BRLF, the members seek (i) To empower Sahariya Community through
creation of sustainable livelihood options and alternatives (ii) To enhance the MFP collection methods and
linkage with markets of MFPs (iii) To sensitize Sahariya women through formation of Self Help Groups, covering
60% women in targeted villages (iv) To Strengthen and facilitate the PRIs and CBOs for extending the benefits
of Government Programmes and welfare schemes (v) To ensure better coordination among line departments.

Brief About the Project
PROJECT TITLE:

Ensuring food security and sustainable livelihood among Sahariya tribes through
effective implementation of flagship programs in Gwalior-Chambal region.
GEOGRAPHICAL FOCUS
Madhya Pradesh

Name of States
Number of Districts

3

Number of Blocks

4
OUTREACH

Number of Villages

215
21,136

Number of Households
Number of tribal families to be covered (%)

100% (All Sahariya Tribe-PVTG)

KEY THEMATIC AREAS OF OPERATION
Sustainable Livelihoods, Capacity building

PARHIT CONSORTIUM- Proposed Theme Wise Fund Utilization
0.20%

0.95%
0.11%

Issue of malnutrition among saharia people in Shivpuri, collector office
Credits: PARHIT

Water and Land Resource Development
46.74%
48.49%

Livestock Management
Institution Building
Sustainable Agriculture
Soil and Water Conservation
Social Security Schemes
Forests/NTFPs

Land Issue at Bundelkhand.
Credits: Parhit

35

1.15%

0.34%
1.13%

0.87%

Innovations and Pilots- PGWM
Nursery Development
36

A ID 360 Software –
BRLF Grant
Management tool

To ensure full transparency in the proposal selection and sanction process, BRLF has commissioned Tata
Consultancy Services (TCS) to develop IT enabled end-to-end transaction based management information
system (MIS). As per the agreement with TCS the software development was supposed to be completed in
a phased manner. Work on first two phase (partner registration and proposal creation) have been completed
and extensive discussions is underway for the third and final phase of the software development.
The MIS provides transparent traceability to every action from selection of grantees to monitoring the

Partner registration
• Aid360 manages the entire grant application from initial contact to final submission with
robust functionality and comprehensive reporting
• Captures prospective grantees information via hosted inquiry forms
• Verifies and validates documents for partner registration
• Built-in high level of automation to generate partner and project login details

Proposal creation
• Enables preparation of results oriented plans
• Creates a fully linked results chain incorporating beneficiary, impact, outcome, output,
activities and inputs at every stage of proposal creation
• Allows for cross program benchmarking and causal drill downs with corresponding
performance indicators
• Built-in monitoring and evaluation framework to disclose project progress and costs at
every stage of implementation
• System validation for the completeness of the proposal
• Enables online submission of the proposal via user interface or by uploading the proposal
document

outcomes of the projects supported by BRLF. It seeks to•

Improve project planning at the grassroots level - As a project management tool, the software design
process enables organizations to rapidly improve their functioning and standardize their approach to
planning for results. Proposal creation using the software requires a clear depiction of a fully linked
result chain incorporating beneficiary, impact, outcome, output, activities and inputs at every stage of
proposal creation

•

Increase program efficiency – Integrated suite to manage finance, Operations and HR helps enhance
efficiency

•

Enhance program effectiveness – Identification of beneficiaries, clear indicators for impacts, outputs,
activities and inputs will ensure strong results orientation

•

Improve decision making – Real-time visibility of program progress, causal drill downs as well as crossprogram benchmarking will help stakeholders take timely and informed decisions.

•

Contribute in learning and sharing best practices – the MIS will enable dispersed program teams to

Proposal evaluation
• Conducts a customized review workflow designed to facilitate evaluation, including prefunding field evaluation, with nuanced decision-making processes
• Allows for objective scoring of every proposal based on evaluation parameters
• Factors in evaluators reports; any other updated information from the field
• Enables preparation of briefing documents for the Project Grantee Selection Committee
based on the latest information from the field
• Provides full status visibility throughout the process to both the prospective grantee and
BRLF

Process compliance monitoring
• Process compliance of proposals and plans
• Provide elapsed time analysis for various process delays and completions
• Tracks status of project at every stage of implementation
• Notifies workflows for process compliance tracking on a timely basis

share experiences, and develop best practices for improved success.
Figure 4 : System functionalities of AID 360 tool

37

38

Capacity Building
B

Initiative for Cadre of
Rural Professionals

RLF is working to develop a multi-centre, multi-topic curriculum for rural professionals. Towards this
BRLF has set up a Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri. S. M. Vijayanand, Secretary
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Government of India. The committee has already met and will be deciding
on the details of this course as well as other interventions aimed at building capacity of rural livelihood
professionals.
The curriculum will seek to cover different dimensions of rural livelihoods such as watershed management,
SHG formation, livelihood options, decentralized governance, common pool resource management etc. This
initiative will be part of a series of 612 month courses on Rural
Livelihoods for rural professionals
(people who belong to the region,
preferably STs) who work for
NGOs, government or PRIs, from
the 1000 or so sub-districts where
BRLF is currently supporting
projects.

BRLF Events

1. BRLF and National Consortium on MGNREGA organized a consultation in Bhubaneswar on 23rd
December 2014 in order to focus attention on the issue of distress migration with special emphasis on
western Odisha.
The objective of the consultation was to bring together civil society, state and central governments to
deliberate on the issues involved and to chart out a course of action for the future. In particular, the
consultation reflected on experiences from the field which have demonstrated the possibility of
leveraging MGNREGA to mitigate this distress migration to draw out a road map for the future.
2. BRLF and Advanced Center for Water Resources Development and Management (ACWADAM)
jointly conducted a sensitization workshop on 'Integrating a Hydrogeology based Aquifier
Management' on 2nd and 3rd May at BAIF development and Research Foundation, BAIF Bhawan,
Dr. Manibhai Deasi Nagar, Warje, Pune. The main aim of the workshop was to deliberate on the issues
related to ground water management. All BRLF project partners were sensitized on importance of
groundwater, the dependence of groundwater and the nature of stress that our aquifers are under
currently. The groundwater resources, issues and challenges and the potential interface between
groundwater, livelihoods and water security at the specific sites for which BRLF proposals have been
received were also discussed.
3. BRLF has conducted several AID 360 tool training and testing workshops with the core team. These
trainings have been organized in partnership with TCS as the technology training partner. Presently,
the first phase of content upload on the AID 360 tool is in progress which will be followed by training with
BRLF partners towards incorporation of the tool for project management, recording, monitoring and
feedback processes. The next training for AID 360 is scheduled for during July 2015.

Each 6-12 month course will be
held at multiple locations, where
BRLF supported NGOs will carry
out largely field based training on
modules that they have
experience and expertise in. By
working across multiple
organizations and sites, BRLF
Discussion on agriculture intervention in a village meeting in Ghatanji block, Yavatmal district, Maharastra by FES team member
Credits: FES
seeks to provide hands-on training
to rural professionals by way of greater exposure and exchange to improve their capacities to address
challenges of rural livelihoods in the central Indian tribal region.
This should go a long way in addressing the shortage of high quality rural professionals in this region. Over time,
these people would emerge as Community Resource Persons building the capacities of other rural
functionaries and also improving the quality of implementation of our flagship programmes. Over time, BRLF
will also make an attempt get the course certified by TISS, IRMA or other such academic institutions.
39

NREGA consortium event, Odisha, organized by BRLF on 23rd December 2014
Credits: Rajib Roul

Partner Sensitization Training on Participatory Groundwater Management
in BAIF campus, organized by ACWADAM in May 2015.
Credits: ACWADAM.

40

Annexure 1: Registration Certificate

41

Annexure 2: MoU with MoRD

42

43

44

45

46

Annexure 3: Section 12 A

47

48

Annexure 4: 80G Certificate

49

Annexure 5: Financial Summary and Audited Accounts (2014-2015)

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64


